Comparison of the degradation and release behaviors of
poly(lactide-co-glycolide)–methoxypoly(ethylene glycol)
microspheres prepared with single- and double-emulsion
evaporation methods
Shuibin Feng, Feng Lu, Yan Wang, Jinping Suo
State Key Laboratory of Material Processing and Die & Mold Technology, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, People’s Republic of China
Correspondence to: J. Suo (E-mail: jinpingsuo@hust.edu.cn)
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to compare the degradation and release behaviors of poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)–
methoxypoly(ethylene glycol) microspheres fabricated by the single-emulsion evaporation method (DEEM) and double-emulsion
evaporation methods (DEEM). Vancomycin and mizolastine were used as the hydrophilic and hydrophobic model drugs, and they
were encapsulated into microspheres through DEEM and SEEM, respectively. The two types of microspheres were similar in size dis-
tribution, but the mizolastine-loaded microspheres showed a much higher encapsulation efficiency than those loaded with vancomy-
cin. Scanning electron microscopy, size, and molecular weight (Mw) analyses during the degradation revealed that the microspheres
fabricated by DEEM underwent a bulk degradation process and showed a faster MW reduction rate during the early degradation
period than the microspheres fabricated by SEEM, which exhibited a surface-to-bulk degradation process according to the Mw and
morphological changes. The mass loss rates of the two types of microspheres were similar, but the mean size decrease rates showed a
little difference. The mizolastine-loaded microspheres exhibited an approximately linear release profile after the initial burst release,
whereas the vancomycin-loaded microspheres showed a more severe burst release, a faster release rate, and thus, a shorter time to full
release. V
C 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2015, 132, 41943.
KEYWORDS: biodegradable; biomaterials; degradation; drug delivery systems
Received 10 September 2014; accepted 2 January 2015
DOI: 10.1002/app.41943
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, special attention has been paid to sustained-
release microspheres based on biodegradable polymers,1–4 such
as
poly(lactide-co-glycolide)
(PLGA),
poly(lactic
acid),
and
poly(e-caprolactone). Patient compliance, drug protection, and
sustained release are part of the many benefits to encapsulating
and releasing a therapeutic agent from polymer microspheres.5
Polymeric microspheres have been prepared by various meth-
ods, such as phase separation,6 solvent evaporation,7 spray dry-
ing,8 and supercritical fluid precipitation.9,10 Among these
methods, the single-emulsion evaporation method (SEEM) and
double-emulsion evaporation method (DEEM) are the most
widely used laboratory techniques for preparing microspheres
encapsulating hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs, respectively.
Many studies have been conducted to optimize microsphere
fabrication conditions with the solvent evaporation method11,12
and to explore the drug-release mechanism. It has been
reported that microspheres fabricated by SEEM and DEEM
showed totally different interior structures;13,14 thus, they may
have a different in drug-release manner. Macromolecular drugs,
such as proteins or peptides, have been preferred as hydrophilic
model drugs in the studies, and they have always shown a typi-
cal triphasic release profile,15,16 whereas hydrophobic model
drugs have mostly been small in molecular weights (MWs) and
have shown various release profiles according to the reports.3,17
The release behaviors of small hydrophobic and hydrophilic
drugs from microspheres of similar size have been scarcely stud-
ied and compared. Li et al.17 studied methotrexate-loaded
PLGA–methoxypoly(ethylene glycol) (mPEG) microspheres (50
lm) prepared by SEEM, and Avgoustakis et al.18 investigated
cisplatin-loaded PLGA–mPEG nanoparticles (150 nm) fabri-
cated by DEEM. The two types of particles exhibited totally
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
V
C 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (1 of 7)

different degradation and release behaviors, but we could not
confirm that it was caused by the particle structure difference,
as the particle size and matrix MW between the two studies
were quite different.
In this study, PLGA–mPEG microspheres were used to encapsu-
late hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs with small MWs
through SEEM and DEEM. The microspheres degradation
behaviors were compared through MW, polydispersity, and
mass changes. The microsphere morphology alternation was
characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to observe
the microsphere erosion process. Nano Measurer 1.2 software
was used to analyze the particle size changes. In vitro release
profiles of the two drugs were also adequately studied and asso-
ciated with their degradation behaviors.
EXPERIMENTAL
Materials
PLGA–mPEG [PLGA9573–mPEG5000 (where 9573 is the Mw of
PLGA, and 5000 is the Mw of mPEG), MW 14,573, lactide/
glycolide (LA/GA) 5 3:1’ was synthesized in our laboratory and
characterized by gel permeation chromatography, IR, 1H-NMR,
and 13C-NMR spectroscopy.19 Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA; poly-
merization degree  1700 and hydrolysis degree  99%) from
China National Medicines Corp., Ltd., was used as a stabilizer
in the emulsion. Methylene chloride, as solvents, was analytical
grade and was purchased from China National Medicines Corp.,
Ltd., and was used without purification. Vancomycin was
obtained from Sigma, and mizolastine was purchased from
Kang Bao Tai Fine Chemical Co., Ltd. (Wu Han, China).
Microsphere Preparation
Vancomycin-loaded microspheres were prepared with DEEM,20
shown in Figure 1(A). First, 0.1 mL of vancomycin solution
(100 mg/mL, in distilled water) was mixed in 4 mL of dichloro-
methane containing 250 mg of PLGA–mPEG, and the mixture
was emulsified at 14,500 rpm for 10 s to obtain the water-in-oil
emulsion. The primary emulsion was then injected slowly into
10 mL of a 0.25% w/v PVA solution and emulsified at
8500 rpm for 10 s to produce the water-in-oil-in-water emul-
sion. Next, the second emulsion was introduced into 120 mL of
a 0.25% w/v PVA solution and continuously stirred at 600 rpm
for 3 h to evaporate the dichloromethane. The solidified micro-
spheres were then centrifuged for 2 min at 3000 rpm, washed
three times with distilled water, lyophilized, and stored at 4C.
Mizolastine microspheres were prepared with SEEM,3,13,21 as
shown in Figure 1(B). A quantity of 10 mg of mizolastine was
added to 3 mL of dichloromethane containing 440 mg of
PLGA–mPEG. The solution was then mixed with 10 mL of a
1% w/v PVA solution under homogenization at 6700 rpm for
30 s to obtain the oil-in-water emulsion. This emulsion was
then added to 100 mL of a 0.1% w/v PVA solution and stirred
Figure 1. Schematic of the preparation procedures for (A) vancomycin-loaded and (B) mizolastine-loaded microspheres. [Color figure can be viewed in
the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
ARTICLE
WILEYONLINELIBRARY.COM/APP
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (2 of 7)
 10974628, 2015, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app.41943 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

continuously for 3 h at 600 rpm to evaporate the dichlorome-
thane completely. The resulting mizolastine microspheres were
then centrifuged for 2 min at 3000 rpm, washed three times
with distilled water, freeze-dried overnight, and stored at 4C.
In addition, the unloaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres were also
prepared under the same conditions for degradation analysis.
Characteristics of the Microspheres
The surface morphology of the microspheres was observed with
SEM (Quanta 200, Holland, FEI). The microspheres were
mounted onto metal stubs with double-sided adhesive tape.
After they were vacuum-coated with a thin layer of gold, the
microspheres were examined by SEM. For the mean size and
size distribution analysis, 300 microspheres in each group were
randomly chosen from the SEM micrograph, and the software
(Nano Measurer 1. 2) was applied to counting the mean size
and size distribution.
The vancomycin and mizolastine encapsulation efficiencies of
the microspheres were measured by ultraviolet–visible (UV–vis)
spectrophotometry and high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy (HPLC), respectively. Briefly, a quantity of 10 mg of dried
vancomycin-loaded microspheres was dissolved in 1 mL of
methylene chloride under stirring, and 3 mL of phosphate
buffer saline (PBS; pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide, 0.02% Tween
80) was then added. The mixture was vigorously agitated for 5
min to extract vancomycin into PBS from the methylene chlo-
ride. After centrifugation, the aqueous phase was withdrawn,
and the amount of drug was analyzed with UV–vis spectropho-
tometry. To determine the mizolastine encapsulation efficiency,
10 mg of mizolastine-loaded microspheres was dissolved in
1 mL of methylene chloride, and then, we added 50 mL of the
HPLC mobile phase (acetonitrile to 0.02 mol/L ammonium
acetate 5 2:3) and stirred the mixture for 1 h. The resulting
mixtures were filtered through 0.45-lm nylon filters and then
analyzed by HPLC. The drug encapsulation efficiency was
expressed as follows:
EE %
ð
Þ5 Actual drug in PLGA–mPEG
ð
Þ=
Initial drug in PLGA–mPEG
ð
Þ3100
All of the experiments were run in triplicate, and the data are
shown as the mean plus or minus the standard deviation.
In Vitro Microsphere Release Behavior Analysis
The in vitro microspheres release experiment was conducted by
the suspension of microspheres in PBS (pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium
azide, 0.02% Tween 80) and maintained at 37C under continu-
ous shaking (50 strokes/min). In consideration of the different
solubility of the two drugs in PBS, we designed different release
conditions. In triplicate, a certain amount of microspheres
(30 mg of vancomycin-loaded microspheres and 15 mg of
mizolastine-loaded microspheres) were suspended in PBS (5 mL
for vancomycin-loaded microspheres and 30 mL for mizolastine-
loaded microspheres) and installed in centrifuge tubes. The tubes
were then sealed and placed in a shaking water bath. At scheduled
time intervals, the tubes were taken out and centrifuged; then, a
certain amount of supernatant (3 mL for vancomycin-loaded
microspheres and 28 mL for mizolastine-loaded microspheres)
was withdrawn to determine the amount of drug released and
was replenished by the same volume of fresh medium. The con-
centration of vancomycin was measured by UV–vis spectropho-
tometry, and that of mizolastine was measured by HPLC.
In Vitro Microsphere Degradation Analysis
Unloaded microspheres prepared under the same conditions
were applied in a degradation study as it was reported5 that
unloaded microspheres degraded in a manner that was very
similar to those loaded with the drugs. The degradation behav-
ior of the microspheres was evaluated by the effects of MW
reduction, total mass loss, morphology, and size changes with
time on their incubation in PBS at 37C, as described in our
previous work.19 Unloaded microspheres which were applied for
degradation analysis were incubated under the same conditions
as those used for the drug-release experiment. As in the in vitro
release experiments, the samples were centrifuged, and the
supernatants were removed at fixed time points for drug-release
analysis. Thus, in the degradation experiment, all of the samples
were centrifuged at the same time point, and the same amount
of supernatant was discarded to remove any acidic degradation
products; this contributed to the autocatalytic degradation of
PLGA–mPEG. If the samples were degraded further, the same
amount of PBS was added back to the tube; if not, the samples
were lyophilized and weighed. The dried PLGA–mPEG micro-
spheres
were
then
used
to
measure
the
MW and
MW
Figure 2. Scanning electron micrographs of the drug-loaded microspheres: (A) vancomycin-loaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres, (B) interior structure of
the vancomycin-loaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres, and (C) mizolastine-loaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres.
ARTICLE
WILEYONLINELIBRARY.COM/APP
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (3 of 7)
 10974628, 2015, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app.41943 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

distribution by gel permeation chromatography. The micro-
spheres mean size changes during degradation were determined
by the software of Nano Measurer 1. 2.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Characteristics of the Microspheres
The drug-loaded microspheres fabricated by DEEM and SEEM
exhibited a spherical and smooth morphology, as shown in
Figure 2. Few vancomycin-loaded microspheres showed broken
morphologies, but all of the mizolastine-loaded microspheres
revealed a sphere shape and smooth surface; this could be
ascribed
to
their
different
fabrication
methods.
The
vancomycin-loaded microspheres exhibited a porous, honey-
comb interior structure; this could also be speculated through
the preparation procedures shown in Figure 1(A). The size dis-
tribution analysis showed a similar result (Figure 3) between the
vancomycin- and mizolastine-loaded microspheres, with average
particle sizes both around 12 lm; this prevented interference in
the degradation and drug release analysis, which may have been
caused by the particle size difference. The encapsulation effi-
ciency was found to be 55.26 6 3.68% for vancomycin in the
PLGA–mPEG
microspheres,
whereas
mizolastine
showed
a
much higher encapsulation efficiency of 93.3 6 2.15%; this was
attributed to the lipophilic nature of mizolastine. Thus, the
drug tended to remain entrapped in the microspheres instead of
being partitioned into the external aqueous phase during the
preparation
process.3,22
Vancomycin-loaded
microspheres
revealed a lower encapsulation efficiency, as part of the hydro-
philic drug was expulsed to the outer water phase during the
preparation process;13 this caused a loss of drug.
In Vitro Microsphere Degradation Analysis
The
microsphere
degradation
experiment
was
conducted
under the same conditions with the in vitro drug-release
Figure
3. Size
distribution
of
the
drug-loaded
microspheres:
(A)
vancomycin-loaded
PLGA–mPEG
microspheres
and
(B)
mizolastine-
loaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres.
Figure 4. (A) Polymer MW, (B) polydispersity, and (C) total mass changes
of the unloaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres during degradation in PBS.
ARTICLE
WILEYONLINELIBRARY.COM/APP
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (4 of 7)
 10974628, 2015, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app.41943 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

experiment. Blank microspheres were applied for degradation
analysis, as it showed the same degradation behavior with the
drug loaded. The MW reduction results revealed that the
microspheres prepared by DEEM showed a faster reduction
rate than the microspheres prepared by SEEM during the ini-
tial degradation period, and the reduction rates both slowed
down in the latter degradation stages, as shown in Figure
4(A). PLGA–mPEG with a higher MW revealed faster a MW
reduction rate for microspheres prepared by DEEM, especially
in the early degradation period, as described in our previous
work.19 However, the PLGA–mPEG initial MW caused no signifi-
cant MW reduction difference for microspheres prepared by
SEEM in the early period, as shown in Figure S1 in the
Supporting Information. Within an early period of 4 days, 74.07%
of the original MW remained for the PLGA–mPEG microspheres
prepared by DEEM, whereas, the percentage came to 89.33% for
the PLGA–mPEG microspheres prepared by SEEM.
The degradation diversity between the two types of micro-
spheres were ascribed to their different interior structures.
According to the reports,13,14 microspheres prepared by DEEM
Figure 5. Scanning electron micrographs of the PLGA–mPEG microsphere morphological changes during degradation in PBS: (A) unloaded PLGA (9.5)–
mPEG (5) microspheres prepared by the double-emulsion evaporation method and (B) unloaded PLGA (9.5)–mPEG (5) microspheres prepared by SEEM.
ARTICLE
WILEYONLINELIBRARY.COM/APP
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (5 of 7)
 10974628, 2015, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app.41943 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

exhibited a capsule or honeycomb interior structure, and micro-
spheres prepared by SEEM were solid spheres. Through the
ultrasonic pulverization of microspheres, we confirmed that the
microspheres prepared by DEEM in this study possessed a hon-
eycomb interior structure [Figure 2(B)], but the microspheres
prepared by SEEM was difficult to break; this, in turn, suggested
that it was a solid sphere as reported.
On the basis of the MW reduction results, we assumed that the
microspheres prepared by DEEM underwent a bulk degradation
process, as water could infiltrate into the particle easily because
of its numerous connecting holes inside. Therefore, the degrada-
tion process occurred in the bulk of the microspheres because
of the complete wetting of the system; this resulted in a fast
MW reduction rate in the early period. On the basis of this
assumption, PLGA–mPEG with a higher MW would exhibited a
faster MW reduction rate because of its more hydrolytic cleav-
able ester groups in the polymer chain; this was confirmed in
our previous study.19 In the latter stage of degradation, the MW
reduction rate slowed down because of the decrease of cleavable
ester bonds, and the MW decreased to a low value, as shown in
Figure 4(A). For the solid microspheres prepared by SEEM,
water was relatively difficult to infiltrate into the particle, the
particle may have undergone a surface-to-bulk degradation in
the early period, and the external matrix eroded first. This
resulted in a slower MW reduction rate of the whole micro-
sphere as compared to that prepared by DEEM. The surface-to-
bulk degradation process also explained the similar MW reduc-
tion rates in the early stage among the PLGA–mPEG micro-
spheres of different MWs (Figure S1). Furthermore, the surface-
to-bulk degradation process caused a wider PLGA–mPEG MW
distribution than in the microspheres prepared by DEEM, as
shown in Figure 4(B). With sustained water infiltration, the
microspheres were gradually filled with water, and the degrada-
tion proceeded in the bulk of the particles in the latter stage.
The assumption of the two types of degradation process was
also supported by the microsphere morphology and size altera-
tions, as shown in Figures 5 and 6. The degradation step
directly controlled the erosion process. Both types of micro-
spheres were subjected to surface modifications (increases in the
roughness) once they were incubated in PBS; this should have
been due to the rearrangement of the polymer chain in the sur-
face as water infiltration. The microspheres prepared by DEEM
exhibited bulk corrosion behavior along with the process of
degradation [Figure 5(A)], whereas microspheres prepared by
SEEM revealed an obvious surface-to-bulk erosion process
[Figure 5(B)], which in turn, confirmed that the degradation
behaviors were probably the same as we assumed. Microspheres
prepared by DEEM showed a slight swelling once they were
incubated into PBS (Figure 6); this was ascribed to the influx of
water. However, no obvious swelling was observed for the
microspheres prepared by SEEM; this indicated a slow water
infiltration into the particles. Both types of microspheres lost
their structure after 7 weeks of degradation, and thus, we only
analyzed the size alternation among 6 weeks.
Although degradation steps were different between the two
types of microspheres prepared by SEEM and DEEM, they
revealed a similar mass loss process. Both the two types of
microspheres showed a slight mass loss during the first week
[Figure 4(C)]; this could probably have been due to the few
soluble degradation products generated in this period. At the
latter stage, the mass loss rate sped up as abundant soluble deg-
radation products generated and dissolved in the PBS; this was
also confirmed by the obvious morphology corrosion and mean
size decrease of the microspheres, as shown in Figures 5 and 6.
In Vitro Microsphere Release Behavior Analysis
The hydrophilic vancomycin and hydrophobic mizolastine were
used as small model drugs and were encapsulated into micro-
spheres through DEEM and SEEM, respectively. Vancomycin-
loaded microspheres exhibited a honeycomb interior structure,
and the drug was distributed in the numerous holes inside the
microspheres, whereas mizolastine was dispersed throughout the
solid microspheres, mixing evenly with the matrix.
The in vitro vancomycin and mizolastine release behaviors from
the PLGA–mPEG microspheres are given in Figure 7. Both of the
microspheres exhibited an obvious initial burst release during the
first day, and this was mostly due to the poorly entrapped or
surface-associated drugs. Compared with the mizolastine-loaded
microspheres, vancomycin showed a more severe burst release as
part of the inner small drug distributed in the interior pores,
which may have transported through the polymer phase because
of microsphere swelling and polymer rearrangement caused by
the fast water infiltration. Mizolastine exhibited a linear-like
release rate after the initial burst release, and the release lasted
for 5 weeks, whereas vancomycin showed a faster release rate,
and it took only 3 weeks for the drug to be released in full. The
different release profiles between vancomycin and mizolastine
may have been ascribed to their different microsphere interior
structures,
drug
distributions
and
microsphere
degradation
behaviors. Bulk degradation happened in vancomycin micro-
spheres may have caused the interior holes to interlinked; thus,
the drug could diffuse out quickly from the polymer phase, and
the pores formed in the microsphere surface. This was caused by
the sustained degradation (Figure 5). However, according to our
previous study,19 a macromolecular hydrophilic drug such as
BSA shows a much slower release rate (lag period) and a longer
time for drug to be released in full, as the macromolecular drug
Figure 6. Mean size change of the unloaded PLGA–mPEG microspheres
during degradation in PBS.
ARTICLE
WILEYONLINELIBRARY.COM/APP
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (6 of 7)
 10974628, 2015, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app.41943 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

could not diffuse out easily until the formation of pores big
enough connecting to the out water.
Mizolastine dispersed throughout the solid microspheres and
released out mostly depended on the microsphere degradation.
Water infiltration and polymer chain arrangement also supplied a
route
for
the
small
hydrophobic
drug
to
diffuse
out.23
Microsphere degradation happened immediately once they were
incubated into PBS; this was accompanied by mizolastine release.
Therefore, the drug-in-matrix blending structure and the surface-
to-bulk erosion behavior may have resulted in the linear-like
release curve. This was also reflected by the microsphere mor-
phology and mean size changes, as shown in Figures 5 and 6.
About 6.3% of mizolastine was retained in the matrix when deg-
radation eventually proceeded to the point of eradication of any
existing microsphere structure within approximately 5 weeks; this
could be explained by its drug-in-matrix blending structure.
CONCLUSIONS
In this research, vancomycin- and mizolastine-loaded PLGA–
mPEG microspheres were successfully prepared by DEEM and
SEEM, respectively. The two types of microspheres possessed
different interior structures and drug distributions. Through
degradation analysis and SEM observation, we found that the
two types of microspheres exhibited totally different degradation
behaviors: a bulk degradation (corrosion) process for the micro-
spheres prepared by DEEM and a surface-to-bulk degradation
(erosion) process for microspheres prepared by SEEM; this was
mostly ascribed to their different interior structures. The differ-
ence in the interior structures and drug distributions also
resulted in different drug-release behaviors, and the erosion
process also contributed to the drug-release profiles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The
authors
acknowledge
the
Independent
Innovation
Foundation of Huazhong University of Science and Technology
(2013ZHYX008), and the analytical and testing center of the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology for useful charac-
terization. The assistance with HPLC measurements by Lihua
Zhao, a technician from the Chemistry Department of the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, is highly appreci-
ated. Shuibin Feng designed the research, completed most of the
experiments, and drafted the article. Feng Lu, Yan Wang, and
Jinping Suo offered valuable opinions on the research. Feng Lu and
Yan Wang also made contributions to the analysis of the results.
Jinping Suo helped a lot in revising the article. All of the authors
approved the submitted and final versions.
REFERENCES
1. Gasparini, G.; Holdich, R. G.; Kosvintsev, S. R. Colloids Surf.
B 2010, 75, 557.
2. Elsaid Ali, A. A.; Taher, M.; Mohamed, F. J. Microencapsul.
2013, 30, 728.
3. Hernan Perez de la Ossa, D.; Ligresti, A.; Gil-Alegre, M. E.;
Aberturas, M. R.; Molpeceres, J.; Di Marzo, V.; Torres
Suarez, A. I. J. Controlled Release 2012, 161, 927.
4. Yang, X. Z.; Dou, S.; Sun, T. M.; Mao, C. Q.; Wang, H. X.;
Wang, J. J. Controlled Release 2011, 156, 203.
5. Sandor, M.; Enscore, D.; Weston, P.; Mathiowitz, E. J.
Controlled Release 2001, 76, 297.
6. Piacentini, E.; Lakshmi, D. S.; Figoli, A.; Drioli, E. J. Membr.
Sci. 2013, 448, 190.
7. Kwon, M. J.; Bae, J. H.; Kim, J. J.; Na, K.; Lee, E. S. Int. J.
Pharm. 2007, 333, 5.
8. Tao, Y.; Zhang, H. L.; Hu, Y. M.; Wan, S.; Su, Z. Q. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 2013, 14, 4174.
9. Jordan, F.; Naylor, A.; Kelly, C. A.; Howdle, S. M.; Lewis, A.;
Illum, L. J. Controlled Release 2010, 141, 153.
10. Sun, G. N.; Chen, Z. M.; Wang, S. S.; Li, L. M.; Fu, J. W.;
Chen, J. F.; Xu, Q. Colloid Polym. Sci. 2011, 289, 1397.
11. Hu, Z.; Liu, Y.; Yuan, W.; Wu, F.; Su, J.; Jin, T. Colloids Surf.
B 2011, 86, 206.
12. Yang, Y. Y.; Chung, T. S.; Ng, N. P. Biomaterials 2001, 22, 231.
13. Rosca, I. D.; Watari, F.; Uo, M. J. Controlled Release 2004,
99, 271.
14. Zhong, D. G.; Liu, Z. H.; Xie, S. S.; Zhang, W.; Zhang, Y.
M.; Xue, W. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013, 129, 767.
15. Zheng, W. Int. J. Pharm. 2009, 374, 90.
16. Yuan, W.; Yuan, W. E.; Wu, F.; Guo, M. Y.; Jin, T. Eur. J.
Pharm. Sci. 2009, 36, 212.
17. Li, J.; Jiang, G.; Ding, F. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2008, 108, 2458.
18. Avgoustakis, K.; Beletsi, A.; Panagi, Z.; Klepetsanis, P.; Karydas,
A. G.; Ithakissios, D. S. J. Controlled Release 2002, 79, 123.
19. Feng, S. B.; Zou, P.; Nie, L.; Suo, J. P. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.
2015, 132, 41431.
20. Meng, F. T.; Ma, G. H.; Liu, Y. D.; Qiu, W.; Su, Z. G.
Colloids Surf. B 2004, 33, 177.
21. Jhunjhunwala, S.; Balmert, S. C.; Raimondi, G.; Dons, E.;
Nichols, E. E.; Thomson, A. W.; Little, S. R. J. Controlled
Release 2012, 159, 78.
22. Lee, J. S.; Feijen, J. J. Controlled Release 2012, 158, 312.
23. Raman, C.; Berkland, C.; Kim, K.; Pack, D. W. J. Controlled
Release 2005, 103, 149.
Figure 7. Release behaviors of (A) vancomycin and (B) mizolastine from
the PLGA–mPEG microspheres.
ARTICLE
WILEYONLINELIBRARY.COM/APP
WWW.MATERIALSVIEWS.COM
J. APPL. POLYM. SCI. 2015, DOI: 10.1002/APP.41943
41943 (7 of 7)
 10974628, 2015, 19, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app.41943 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [22/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License