## Materials Methods
high efficiency and an improved drug...

Synthesis and characterization of polymeric magnetic
nanoparticles loaded by gemcitabine /

Parsian, Maryam; Gunduz, Ufuk; Tezcaner, Aysen; Department
of Biotechnology 

In this study, different types of magnetic nanoparticles were
synthesized for treatment of breast cancer by targeted drug
delivery. Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer, Chitosan (CS)
and Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) coated magnetic
nanoparticles were prepared and loaded with Gemcitabine.
The loading efficiency of drug for various half generations of
dendrimer coated magnetic nanoparticles (DcMNPs), Chitosan
coated magnetic nanoparticles (CSMNPs) and
Polyhydroxybutyrate magnetic nanoparticles (PHB-MNPs)
were inves...

Biopolymer based micro/nanoparticles as drug carriers for the
treatment of skin diseases

Eke, Gozde; Hasirci, Vasif Nejat; Hasirci, Nesrin; Department
of Micro and Nanotechnology 

Controlled drug delivery systems are becoming increasingly
interesting with the contribution of nanotechnology. In the
case of transdermal applications the greatest limitation is the
highly impermeable outermost layer of the skin, the stratum

drug delivery of the skin therapeutics is the use of
nanoparticles as carriers. Encapsulation of the drug, as
opposed to classical topical application of creams or
emulsions, allows the drug to diffuse into hair f...

Fatty acid based hyperbranched polymeric nanoparticles for
hydrophobic drug delivery

Guc, Esra; GUNDUZ, GUNGOR; Gunduz, Ufuk (2010-10-01)

Background: In recent years nano-sized dendrimer/
hyperbranched polymers gained importance in drug delivery
applications. Objective: In this study, a novel fatty acid-based
hyperbranched resin (HBR) was synthesized and used for

core of the HBR was dipentaerythritol, and the branching was
provided by dimethylolpropionic acid. The molecule was
terminated by ricinoleic acid. Chemical and structural
characterization of the resin was carried out and then...

Citation Formats

* IEEE
* ACM
* APA
* CHICAGO
* MLA
* BibTeX

A. YAKAR, G. Tansik, T. Keskin, and U. Gunduz, "Tailoring the
magnetic behavior of polymeric particles for bioapplications,"
JOURNAL OF POLYMER ENGINEERING, pp. 265-274, 2013,
Accessed: 00, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
hdl.handle.net/11511/31311.

METU IIS - Integrated Information Service
open@metu.edu.tr
You can transmit your request, problems about OpenMETU.