CGRP-releasing PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres enhance
distraction osteogenesis via activation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway
Yimurang Hamiti a,b,1, Kai Liu a,b,1, Xin Yang a,b, Sulong Wang a,b, Xiriaili Kadier a,b,
Aihemaitijiang Yusufu a,b,*
a Department of Trauma and Microreconstructive Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China
b Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Trauma Repair and Reconstruction, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
CGRP
PLGA microspheres
Distraction osteogenesis
Bone regeneration
cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway
A B S T R A C T
Large bone defects present significant clinical challenges, with distraction osteogenesis (DO) requiring prolonged
treatment periods and yielding suboptimal outcomes. Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) demonstrates
potent bone-forming activity but suffers from rapid degradation and a short half-life, limiting its therapeutic
applications. This study engineered sustained-release CGRP microspheres using poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)/
nano-hydroxyapatite/graphene oxide (PLGA/nHA/GO) composite matrices via W/O/W double emulsion-
solvent evaporation method to address these limitations. The fabricated microspheres exhibited uniform
spherical morphology (51.15 ± 0.40 μm), high encapsulation efficiency (86.14 ± 2.5 %), and sustained CGRP
release over 42 days. In vitro studies compared four groups: control (untreated), blank microspheres, free CGRP
solution, and CGRP-loaded microspheres. CGRP microspheres significantly enhanced rat bone marrow mesen­
chymal stem cell proliferation, migration capacity, and osteogenic differentiation compared to all other treat­
ment groups. Mechanistic investigations confirmed activation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathway with
upregulation of osteogenic transcription factors (Runx2, Osterix) and bone matrix proteins (osteopontin,
osteocalcin). In a rat femoral distraction osteogenesis model, CGRP microspheres demonstrated superior bone
regeneration compared to control, blank microspheres, and free CGRP groups: substantially increased bone
mineral density, significantly improved biomechanical properties, and accelerated bone formation. Histological
analysis confirmed enhanced bone maturation and integration This engineered sustained-release system repre­
sents a promising therapeutic platform for enhancing bone regeneration through targeted molecular pathway
activation, offering significant potential for clinical translation in orthopedic applications.
1. Introduction
Large bone defects resulting from severe trauma, tumor resection,
infection, or congenital malformations represent one of the most
formidable challenges in orthopedic surgery [1]. Traditional therapeutic
approaches, including the use of autologous bone grafts, allografts, and
xenografts, are constrained by inherent limitations such as limited donor
site availability, risk of donor site morbidity, immune rejection, and
disease transmission [2,3]. Distraction osteogenesis (DO), pioneered by
the Russian orthopedic surgeon Gavriil Abramovich Ilizarov, is a
well-established bone regeneration technique in which gradual,
controlled mechanical traction is applied to bone segments to stimulate
the body’s intrinsic osteogenic potential. Based on Ilizarov’s biological
law of "tension-stress," this technique has been widely adopted for limb
lengthening, deformity correction, and large bone defect reconstruction
[4,5]. The DO process encompasses three distinct phases: a latency
period (5–7 days) for initial healing, a distraction phase where
controlled separation at 0.5–2.0 mm/day stimulates new bone forma­
tion, and a consolidation phase during which bone callus mineralizes
and remodels [6]. While DO offers advantages over traditional bone
grafting by avoiding donor site morbidity and simultaneously regener­
ating bone and soft tissues, the treatment typically requires prolonged
duration (6–12 months) and may be associated with complications
including nonunion, delayed healing, pin site infections, and patient
* Corresponding author. Department of Trauma and Microreconstructive Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang,
China.
E-mail address: ahmatjang@163.com (A. Yusufu).
1 These authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today Bio
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2025.102181
Received 6 June 2025; Received in revised form 19 July 2025; Accepted 8 August 2025
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
Available online 14 August 2025
2590-0064/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/ ).

discomfort [7,8]. Recent advances in understanding the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of DO have revealed that bone marrow mesen­
chymal stem cells (BMSCs) play pivotal roles by migrating to distraction
sites and differentiating into osteoblasts in response to mechanical
stimulation [9–14]. Therefore, development of effective adjuvant ther­
apeutic strategies to accelerate new bone formation, maturation, and
mineralization during DO, thereby reducing treatment duration and
improving bone regeneration quality, holds substantial clinical
significance.
Among the various bioactive factors capable of promoting bone
regeneration, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) presents unique
advantages that remain underexplored because of critical pharmaceu­
tical challenges. CGRP, a 37-amino acid neuropeptide synthesized and
released primarily by sensory neurons, represents one of the most potent
endogenous vasodilators known and extensively participates in neuro­
transmission, inflammation regulation, pain perception, and tissue
repair [15–18]. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that CGRP
plays a pivotal role in bone metabolism, with CGRP and its receptors
widely expressed in osteoblasts, osteocytes, osteoclasts, and bone
marrow stromal cells [19,20]. Studies have shown that CGRP directly
stimulates osteoblast proliferation and differentiation while promoting
the synthesis of bone matrix proteins, thereby enhancing bone formation
[21,22]. CGRP was selected for this study based on several compelling
advantages over other osteogenic agents: (1) it has a dual mechanism of
action-unlike growth factors that primarily target either osteoblasts or
osteoclasts, CGRP simultaneously stimulates bone formation while
inhibiting bone resorption, providing balanced bone remodeling regu­
lation [23,24]; (2) clinical relevance-CGRP is naturally released during
bone healing processes and distraction osteogenesis, making it a phys­
iologically relevant therapeutic target [25]; (3) unique signaling
pathway-CGRP activates the cAMP/PKA/CREB cascade, which differs
from Smad-dependent pathways, potentially offering complementary
therapeutic mechanisms; and (4) superior safety profile-as an endoge­
nous peptide, CGRP has well-established safety compared with that of
recombinant growth factors. While bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs) are potent osteoinductors, they are associated with significant
side effects including ectopic bone formation, inflammatory responses,
and high costs [26]. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) primarily
stimulates cell proliferation but has limited direct osteogenic effects
[27]. Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) promotes osteoblast function
but lacks the antiresorptive properties of CGRP [28]. In contrast, CGRP
exerts balanced bone anabolic and anticatabolic effects through
endogenous pathways, making it particularly suitable for the complex
bone remodeling processes involved in distraction osteogenesis. How­
ever, CGRP exhibits an extremely short in vivo half-life (2–10 min) due
to rapid enzymatic degradation and poor tissue penetration, severely
limiting its clinical application potential [29–31].
To overcome these pharmaceutical limitations while harnessing the
unique osteogenic potential of CGRP, in this study, a novel sustained-
release system was engineered using poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)/
nano-hydroxyapatite/graphene oxide (PLGA/nHA/GO) composite mi­
crospheres. PLGA, an FDA-approved biodegradable polymer, provides
controlled drug release through gradual hydrolysis while maintaining
effective drug concentrations at target sites [32–34]. To further enhance
bioactivity and osteoconductive properties, nHA was incorporated as
the primary component of natural bone minerals, providing excellent
biocompatibility and favorable microenvironments for osteoblast func­
tion [35,36]. Owing to its unique physicochemical properties, including
large specific surface area and abundant surface functional groups,
graphene oxide has demonstrated potential for promoting stem cell
osteogenic differentiation through the modulation of intracellular
signaling pathways [37–40]. The integration of these components cre­
ates a synergistic platform that addresses the pharmacokinetic limita­
tions of CGRP while potentially enhancing its biological effects.
Furthermore, this study systematically investigated the molecular
mechanisms underlying the osteogenic effects of CGRP, specifically
focusing on the cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathway, where CGRP
binding to G protein-coupled receptors activates adenylyl cyclase, ele­
vates intracellular cAMP levels, activates PKA, and phosphorylates
CREB to regulate the expression of osteogenic genes [41–45].
Based on this background, this study aimed to (1) successfully pre­
pare and characterize CGRP-loaded PLGA/nHA/GO composite micro­
spheres with optimal physicochemical properties and sustained-release
performance; (2) systematically investigate their effects on rat BMSC
proliferation, migration, and osteogenic differentiation while eluci­
dating the underlying cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling mechanisms through
in vitro experiments; and (3) comprehensively evaluate their efficacy in
promoting bone regeneration in a rat femoral distraction osteogenesis
model through radiological, biomechanical, and histomorphological
assessments. We hypothesized that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite
microspheres can achieve long-term sustained CGRP release and effec­
tively promote rBMSC osteogenic differentiation through cAMP/PKA/
CREB signaling pathway activation, thereby significantly enhancing DO
efficiency and quality in vivo. The results of this study are expected to
provide important experimental evidence and theoretical support for the
development of novel, efficient CGRP-based bone regeneration thera­
peutic strategies.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials and reagents
Poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA, lactide:glycolide molar ratio
50:50, ester-terminated, molecular weight 10,000–20,000 Da) was
purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Bio-Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai,
China). Nano-hydroxyapatite (nHA, particle size <200 nm) was ob­
tained from Aladdin Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
Single-layer graphene oxide (GO) was procured from Adamas Reagent
Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, molecular weight
9000–10,000 Da, 80 % hydrolyzed) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO, USA). Rat α-calcitonin gene-related peptide (rat α-CGRP,
HY-P0203) was obtained from MCE (Shanghai, China). All other
chemicals and solvents were of analytical grade or higher purity. Ul­
trapure water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm was used throughout all
experiments.
2.2. Drug-loaded microsphere preparation
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres were prepared via a
W/O/W double emulsion-solvent evaporation method. The detailed
procedure included the following key steps: (1) Organic phase prepa­
ration and nanoparticle dispersion: precisely weighed PLGA (200 mg),
nHA (50 mg), and GO (2 mg) were dispersed in dichloromethane (DCM,
8 mL) using a three-step protocol: ultrasonication of nHA and GO in
DCM for 10 min to break up agglomerates, followed by high-speed
stirring at 1300 rpm for 10 min, then dissolution of PLGA with addi­
tional stirring for 10 min to form a homogeneous organic phase sus­
pension. (2) Primary emulsion formation: One milliliter of CGRP
aqueous solution (10−5 mol/L) served as the inner aqueous phase (W),
which was slowly added dropwise to the high-speed stirred (1300 rpm)
organic phase under ice-bath conditions, followed by continuous stirring
for 10 min to form the W1/O primary emulsion. (3) Double emulsion
formation: PVA (1.2 g) was precisely weighed and dissolved in ultrapure
water (80 mL) in an 80 ◦C water bath under stirring for approximately 1
h until complete dissolution and then cooled to room temperature to
obtain a 1.5 % (w/v) PVA solution as the external aqueous phase (W2).
The PVA external aqueous phase was magnetically stirred at 1300 rpm
while the W/O primary emulsion was slowly added dropwise, ensuring
an organic phase to external aqueous phase volume ratio of approxi­
mately 1:10. After continued emulsification under stirring for 10 min,
the mixed emulsion was subjected to ultrasonication via an ultrasonic
cell disruptor (power, 50 W; processing time, 30 s; working time, 2 s;
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
2

remaining time, 3 s). (4) Microsphere solidification and collection: The
double emulsion was continuously magnetically stirred at room tem­
perature for 5–6 h to allow complete DCM evaporation and gradual
microsphere solidification. After stirring completion, the suspension was
allowed to stand overnight for microsphere sedimentation. The
following day, the microspheres were collected by centrifugation via a
high-speed refrigerated centrifuge at 4 ◦C and 4000 rpm for 5 min. After
discarding the supernatant was discarded, the microspheres were
washed 3–5 times with abundant ultrapure water to remove residual
PVA and unencapsulated CGRP. The cleaned microspheres were resus­
pended in a small amount of ultrapure water, transferred to freeze-
drying vials, and freeze-dried under vacuum conditions for at least 24
h using a freeze dryer, ultimately resulting in dried CGRP-PLGA/nHA/
GO composite microsphere powder. As controls, blank PLGA/nHA/GO
microspheres without CGRP were prepared via the same method. All
prepared microspheres were stored sealed and dried at −20 ◦C for future
use.
2.3. Drug-loaded microsphere characterization
2.3.1. Particle size analysis
The microsphere particle size distribution was determined using a
laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern In­
struments, UK). Appropriate amounts of dried microspheres were
dispersed in deionized water and ultrasonicated for 3 min before mea­
surement. The particle refractive index was set to 1.59, the absorption
coefficient to 0.1, and the dispersion medium as water. Each sample was
measured in triplicate.
2.3.2. Morphology and surface characteristics
Microsphere morphology and surface characteristics were observed
by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-7610FPLUS, Tokyo,
Japan). The dried microsphere samples were mounted on sample stages,
gold-sputtered using a vacuum ion sputter coater, and observed at 5 kV
accelerating voltage. To investigate internal microsphere structure,
some microspheres were freeze-fractured in liquid nitrogen to expose
internal cross-sections for SEM observation. Surface-porosity metrics
were obtained from 20 k × SEM micrographs. For each of three inde­
pendent batches, 30 randomly selected microspheres were binarised in
ImageJ (threshold = 110), and automated particle analysis was used to
calculate projected porosity (% area) and equivalent circular pore
diameter.
2.3.3. Chemical structure and phase composition
Chemical structure and phase composition analyses included Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray diffraction (XRD).
FTIR analysis was performed using an infrared spectrometer (NicoletiS
20, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) to analyze the chemical structures of
the PLGA, nHA, GO raw materials and CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite
microspheres. Samples were mixed with dried KBr powder at approxi­
mately 1:100 ratio, ground uniformly, and pressed into pellets. Scanning
was performed in the 400-4000 cm−1 wavenumber range with 4 cm−1
resolution and 32 accumulated scans. XRD analysis was conducted using
an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) to
analyze crystal structures of various components in microspheres.
Testing conditions included Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 0.15406 nm),
tube voltage 40 kV, tube current 20 mA, scanning in 5–60◦2θ range with
0.03◦step size and 2◦/min scanning speed.
2.3.4. Encapsulation efficiency and drug loading
The CGRP encapsulation efficiency (EE) and drug loading (DL)
ability of the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres were
determined using a CGRP ELISA kit (Elabscience, Wuhan, China). Pre­
cisely weighed amounts of composite microspheres were fully dispersed
in appropriate volumes of 2 % SDS solution and ultrasonically disrupted
for 30 min to destroy microsphere structure and completely release
CGRP. After centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ◦C to separate
microsphere debris, supernatants were collected, appropriately diluted,
and analyzed according to ELISA kit instructions to determine actual
CGRP loading. EE and DL were calculated based on initial theoretical
total CGRP mass added. All measurements were performed in triplicate,
with results expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Calculation
formulas were: Encapsulation Efficiency (EE) (%) = (Total CGRP input -
Free CGRP amount)/Total CGRP input × 100 %; Drug Loading (DL) (%)
= (Total CGRP input - Free CGRP amount)/Total microsphere mass ×
100 %.
2.3.5. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and elemental mapping
Elemental distribution within composite microspheres was analyzed
using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) coupled with scan­
ning electron microscopy (JEOL JSM-7610FPLUS, Tokyo, Japan).
Microsphere samples were carbon-coated and analyzed at 10 kV accel­
erating voltage. Elemental mapping was performed to visualize the
spatial distribution of carbon (C), oxygen (O), calcium (Ca), and phos­
phorus (P) within individual microspheres.
2.3.6. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
Thermal degradation behavior and component quantification were
analyzed using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA-50, Shimadzu,
Japan). Samples (5–10 mg) were heated from 25 ◦C to 800 ◦C at a
heating rate of 10 ◦C/min under nitrogen atmosphere (50 mL/min). The
thermal degradation profiles of pure PLGA, nHA, GO, and composite
microspheres were compared to confirm successful incorporation and
determine actual nanoparticle loading efficiency.
2.4. In vitro drug release and degradation
2.4.1. In vitro CGRP release study
To evaluate drug release kinetics and biodegradation performance of
composite microspheres, accurately weighed CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
composite microspheres (300 mg) were placed in centrifuge tubes con­
taining 10 mL PBS (0.01 mol/L, pH 7.4, containing 0.1 % w/v BSA). BSA
addition aimed to simulate physiological fluid environment and prevent
CGRP concentration reduction due to non-specific adsorption. Centri­
fuge tubes were subsequently placed in a constant-temperature hori­
zontal shaker at 37 ◦C, 100 rpm for oscillation. At predetermined time
points (0.5h, 1d, 3d, 5d, 7d, 14d, 21d, 28d, 35d, 42d), 2 mL release
medium was withdrawn from each centrifuge tube, and immediately
replaced with 2 mL fresh PBS buffer solution preheated to 37 ◦C to
maintain total release system volume and "sink" conditions. Withdrawn
release solutions were centrifuged at 4 ◦C, 10,000 rpm for 10 min, su­
pernatants were collected, and CGRP concentrations were determined
using CGRP ELISA kit.
2.4.2. In vitro microsphere degradation behavior
Precisely weighed CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres
(300 mg) were placed in centrifuge tubes containing 3 mL PBS (0.01
mol/L, pH 7.4) and 0.1 mg/mL protease XIV (P5147, Sigma-Aldrich).
Protease XIV addition aimed to simulate in vivo enzymatic degrada­
tion environment. Centrifuge tubes were incubated in a constant-
temperature shaker at 37 ◦C, 100 rpm. At predetermined time in­
tervals (1d, 3d, 7d, 14d, 21d, 28d, 35d, 42d), samples were removed and
centrifuged, and supernatants were carefully aspirated. Collected mi­
crospheres were washed several times with ultrapure water and freeze-
dried to constant weight. Microsphere samples at different degradation
time points were subjected to SEM observation to record surface
morphology and structural changes over time. Microsphere degradation
rate was calculated using the following formula: Degradation Rate (%) =
(W0-Wt)/W0 × 100 %. Where W0 is initial dry weight of microspheres
before degradation, and Wt is remaining mass of microspheres after
freeze-drying. Three parallel samples were established for each group,
with results expressed as mean ± SD.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
3

2.5. In vitro cell studies
2.5.1. Cell culture
Rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (rBMSCs) used in this
study were purchased from Wuhan Procell Life Science & Technology
Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). These cells were routinely cultured in α-MEM
medium containing 10 % FBS (Gibco, USA) and 1 % antibiotic-
antimycotic mixture (Gibco, USA). The culture environment was
maintained in a humidified incubator at 37 ◦C with 5 % CO2. The cell
culture medium was changed every two days to ensure adequate
nutrition and suitable microenvironment for cell growth.
2.5.2. Biocompatibility
To evaluate the in vitro cytotoxicity of the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
composite microspheres, appropriate amounts of microspheres were
sterilized under UV lamp irradiation for 12 h and extracted in serum-free
α-MEM culture medium at a material mass to extraction liquid volume
ratio of 0.2 g/mL for 24 h at 37 ◦C. After extraction completion,
extraction liquids were centrifuged and filtered through 0.22 μm
microporous membranes. rBMSCs were seeded in 96-well plates at a
density of 1 × 104 cells per well and exposed to different concentration
gradients (5.0 %, 15.0 %, 30.0 %, 60.0 %, 100.0 % v/v) of microsphere
extraction liquids. On days 1, 3, 5, and 7 of culture, 10 μL CCK-8 solution
was added to each well, followed by continued incubation at 37 ◦C for
1–2 h, then optical density (OD values) was measured at 450 nm using a
microplate reader.
2.5.3. Cell morphology and proliferation
To thoroughly investigate effects of CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO micro­
spheres on rBMSC biological behaviors and potential PKA signaling
pathway mechanisms, this study established the following four experi­
mental groups for comparative analysis: (1) Control group, cells
cultured only in blank culture medium; (2) PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere
group, cells co-cultured with CGRP-free blank microspheres (30 mg/
well); (3) CGRP solution group, cells directly exposed to 10−5 mol/L
CGRP solution; (4) CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group, cells co-
cultured with CGRP-loaded composite microspheres (30 mg/well, con­
taining equivalent 10−5 mol/L CGRP).
Cell viability was assessed using Calcein AM/PI dual staining kit
(EFL, Suzhou, China). rBMSCs were seeded in 12-well plates at a density
of 2 × 104 cells per well, treated according to group assignments for 1
and 3 days, then stained according to kit instructions. Cell adhesion
morphology was observed using Phalloidin-FITC/DAPI staining (YEA­
SEN, Shanghai, China) to visualize F-actin cytoskeleton distribution and
nuclear morphology. Cell proliferation capacity was detected using CCK-
8 method. rBMSCs were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 1 × 104
cells per well. On days 1, 3, 5, and 7 of culture, culture medium was
aspirated and 100 μL complete culture medium containing 10 % CCK-8
was added to each well, followed by dark incubation at 37 ◦C for 1 h,
then OD values were detected at 450 nm using a multifunctional
microplate reader.
2.5.4. Cell apoptosis
Annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining method (Beyotime Biotechnology,
China) combined with flow cytometry was used to quantitatively
analyze cell apoptosis/necrosis status. rBMSCs were seeded in 6-well
plates at a density of 1 × 105 cells per well, treated according to
group assignments and cultured for 6 h, then changed to serum-free
culture medium and continued culture for 12 and 24 h before cell
collection. Cells were resuspended in Binding Buffer, 5 μL Annexin V-
FITC and 5 μL PI were added, followed by dark reaction at room tem­
perature for 10 min, then cell apoptosis was detected using flow
cytometry (BD Biosciences, USA).
2.5.5. Cell migration
Cell migration capacity was evaluated using both Transwell
migration assay and scratch assay methods. Transwell chambers with 8
μm pore size (Corning Costar Corp, USA) were used with 200 μL cell
suspension (containing 5 × 104 cells) seeded into upper chambers and
600 μL culture medium containing different treatment groups in lower
chambers. Culture plates were placed in a 37 ◦C, 5 % CO2 incubator for
24 h. For scratch assay, logarithmic growth phase rBMSCs were seeded
in 24-well plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well, cultured until cell
confluence reached approximately 90–100 %. A sterile 200 μL pipette
tip was used to create a straight "wound" line in the cell monolayer
center. Scratch area images were observed and photographed at 0, 12,
and 24 h.
2.5.6. In vitro osteogenic properties
To evaluate effects of CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres
on rBMSC osteogenic differentiation, cells were cultured in specialized
osteogenic induction medium (OriCell, Cyagen Biosciences, Guangzhou,
China). Osteogenic differentiation levels were assessed through Alizarin
Red S (ARS) staining and quantification for late-stage mineralization,
and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity detection, staining, and quan­
tification for early-stage osteogenic markers. For ARS staining, rBMSCs
were seeded in 12-well plates at a density of 2 × 104 cells per well. After
14 and 21 days of culture, cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde
and stained with 1 % ARS solution. For quantitative analysis, bound dye
was extracted using 10 % cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) solution and
absorbance was measured at 562 nm. For ALP staining, cells were
cultured for 4 and 7 days, then fixed and stained using BCIP/NBT
alkaline phosphatase color development kit (Beyotime Biotechnology,
China). For quantitative ALP activity measurement, cells were lysed
with RIPA buffer and incubated with p-nitrophenyl phosphate (p-NPP)
substrate solution. ALP activity was normalized to total protein content
determined by BCA assay.
2.6. Molecular biology studies
2.6.1. cAMP concentration detection (ELISA method)
After rBMSCs were treated according to above groupings for 30 min,
cells were collected. Cells were washed twice with pre-chilled PBS, then
cell lysis buffer was added for cell lysis on ice. According to cAMP ELISA
kit (Elabscience, Wuhan, China) instructions, cAMP concentrations in
cell lysates were measured. Total protein concentrations were deter­
mined by BCA method for cAMP concentration standardization.
2.6.2. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
rBMSCs were seeded in 6-well culture plates at a density of 2 × 105
cells per well, routinely cultured for 1 day, then changed to osteogenic
induction medium containing different treatment groups. After 7 days of
culture, cells were collected and total RNA was extracted using TRIzol
reagent (Invitrogen). After determining RNA concentration and purity,
1 μg total RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using PrimeScript™ RT
Master Mix (TaKaRa, Japan). Using diluted cDNA as template, amplifi­
cation was performed on a real-time fluorescence quantitative PCR in­
strument using SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™ II (TaKaRa). Target genes
detected included osteogenic-related genes Runx2, Spp1 (OPN), Bglap
(OCN), SP7 (Osx), and cell proliferation-related gene CyclinD1. Gapdh
served as internal reference gene.
2.6.3. Western Blot analysis
Western Blot analysis was performed to detect related protein
expression and phosphorylation levels. For phosphorylated protein
detection, BMSCs were subjected to serum starvation for 12–24 h, fol­
lowed by stimulation with corresponding drugs for 30 min according to
grouping before cell collection. For total protein detection, BMSCs were
cultured in osteogenic induction medium for 7 days before collecting
cells from each group. RIPA lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors
and phosphatase inhibitors was added for cell lysis on ice for 30 min to
extract total proteins. After determining protein concentrations by BCA
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
4

method, equal amounts of total proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE gel
electrophoresis, then proteins were wet-transferred to PVDF mem­
branes. Membranes were blocked with TBST buffer containing 5 %
skimmed milk at room temperature for 1–2 h. Subsequently, PVDF
membranes were incubated overnight at 4 ◦C with specific primary
antibodies including PKA antibody (Affinity, AF7746), phosphorylated
PKA antibody (Affinity, AF7246), CREB antibody (Affinity, AF6188),
phosphorylated CREB antibody (Affinity, AF3189), OPN antibody (Af­
finity, AF0227), OCN antibody (Affinity, DF12303) (Affinity Bio­
sciences, USA); Runx2 antibody (Abcam, ab236639), Osx antibody
(Abcam, ab209484), CyclinD1 antibody (Abcam, ab134175), GAPDH
antibody (Abcam, ab181602) (Abcam, UK). After washing, HRP-labeled
secondary antibodies (Abcam, ab6721) were incubated at room tem­
perature for 1 h. Enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit was used to
detect protein bands, and ImageJ software was used for quantitative
analysis.
2.7. In vivo experiments
2.7.1. Animals
This study selected adult male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats weighing
approximately 420 g, provided by Xinjiang Medical University Labora­
tory Animal Center. All rats were housed in specific pathogen-free (SPF)
grade animal facilities with strictly controlled environmental condi­
tions. All animal experimental procedures strictly followed institutional
guidelines and were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Xin­
jiang Medical University (Ethics approval number: IACUC-JT-
20231121-35).
2.7.2. Establishment of rat femoral distraction osteogenesis model and
grouped treatment
This study included 84 SD rats for in vivo experiments. Rats were
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 2 % pentobarbital sodium (3
mg/100 g body weight). After satisfactory anesthesia, routine prepara­
tion and disinfection of the right femoral surgical area were performed.
Under strict aseptic conditions, a longitudinal skin incision approxi­
mately 2 cm long was made on the lateral aspect of the right femoral
mid-shaft. A specially designed unilateral mini external fixator was used
with four 1.2 mm diameter stainless steel self-tapping screws inserted to
securely install the external fixator on the lateral femur. Precise trans­
verse osteotomy was performed at the midpoint of the femoral shaft
between the two pairs of fixation pins using a micro oscillating saw.
After osteotomy completion, the surgical area was thoroughly irrigated
with sterile saline, and muscles, fascia, and skin were sutured layer by
layer. Distraction protocol implementation began after a 5-day latency
period. Femoral distraction proceeded at 0.25 mm increments every 12
h (total daily distraction distance of 0.5 mm), continued for 10
consecutive days, creating a 5.0 mm distraction gap. After distraction
phase completion, experimental animals entered a 6-week bone tissue
mineralization consolidation period.
All successfully modeled rats were randomly divided into four
experimental groups, each containing 21 rats: (1) Control group: Local
injection of saline 100 μL; (2) PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group: Local
injection of drug-free blank microspheres (30 mg in 100 μL saline); (3)
CGRP solution group: Local injection of CGRP solution (10−5 mol/L,
100 μL); (4) CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group: Local injection of
CGRP-loaded composite microspheres (30 mg in 100 μL saline).
2.7.3. Gross Specimen Observation and digital radiographic assessment
After animal sacrifice at predetermined time points, extracted
femoral specimens were subjected to gross observation and photo­
graphic documentation, focusing on new bone morphology and healing
progression in distraction areas. Weekly anteroposterior X-ray exami­
nations were performed using digital X-ray equipment (HF400VA,
MIKASA X-RAY Co., Ltd., Japan) under standardized conditions (44 kV,
4.5 mAs) to dynamically monitor bone callus formation and density
changes within distraction gaps throughout the consolidation period.
2.7.4. Micro-computed tomography assessment
At 6 weeks after consolidation completion, femoral specimens from
each group (n = 3) were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde and analyzed
using high-resolution Micro-CT scanner (SkyScan 1176, Bruker, Ger­
many). Scanning parameters were set as: voltage 65 kV, current 385 μA,
voxel size 18 μm. The entire distraction area was selected as the region
of interest for quantitative analysis. Key bone microstructural parame­
ters were measured including bone mineral density (BMD), bone volume
fraction (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), trabecular thickness (Tb.
Th), and trabecular separation (Tb.Sp).
2.7.5. Biomechanical testing
At Biomechanical performance testing was performed on right
femoral specimens from each group (n = 3) after external fixator
removal. Specimens were placed on a three-point bending testing ma­
chine (JD-D500/JD-T100, Zhongji Testing Equipment, China) with
support point spacing of 18 mm. Loading was applied at the midpoint of
distraction areas in the anteroposterior direction at a constant rate of
0.5 mm/min until fracture occurred. Load-displacement curves were
recorded to calculate ultimate load, energy to failure, and stiffness.
2.7.6. Histomorphological and immunohistochemical analysis
Detailed histomorphological and immunohistochemical analyses
were performed at 2, 4, and 6 weeks after consolidation completion. For
histological staining, femoral specimens (n = 3 per group) were fixed in
10 % neutral formalin, embedded in methyl methacrylate, and sectioned
at 10 μm thickness using a hard tissue microtome. Sections were stained
with Von Kossa, Masson’s trichrome, Goldner’s trichrome, and Safranin
O-Fast Green to evaluate mineralized bone distribution, collagen orga­
nization, and cartilage presence.
For immunohistochemical analysis, separate specimens were decal­
cified in 10 % EDTA solution, paraffin-embedded, and sectioned at 5 μm
thickness. After antigen retrieval and blocking, sections were incubated
with primary antibodies: Anti-Runx2 (Bioss, bs-1134R), Anti-Osterix
(Osx) (Servicebio, GB111900), Anti-osteocalcin (OCN) (Servicebio,
GB115684), Anti-osteopontin (OPN) (Servicebio, GB11500), Anti-
phosphorylated PKA (p-PKA (Affinity Biosciences, AF7246), Anti-
phosphorylated CREB (p-CREB) (Affinity Biosciences, AF3189).
Following standard immunohistochemical procedures with HRP-labeled
secondary antibodies and DAB development, positive staining areas
were quantified using ImageJ software.
2.8. Statistical analysis
All experimental data were analyzed using SPSS 22.0 statistical
software package. Quantitative data were uniformly expressed as mean
± standard deviation. Before parametric testing, Shapiro-Wilk test was
used to assess normal distribution of data. If data followed normal dis­
tribution and showed homogeneity of variance, independent samples t-
test was used for comparisons between two groups; for multiple group
comparisons, one-way analysis of variance (One-way ANOVA) was
employed with post-hoc multiple comparison methods such as Tukey’s
HSD test or LSD test for pairwise comparisons. All statistical tests were
set as two-sided tests, with P < 0.05 as the criterion for determining
statistical significance. Charts were created using GraphPad Prism v.8.0
software.
3. Results
3.1. Composite microsphere characterization
3.1.1. Microsphere morphology, particle size, and distribution
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations (Fig. 1A) revealed
that
successfully
prepared
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
composite
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
5

Fig. 1. Characterization of CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO Composite Microspheres (A) SEM morphology images showing spherical morphology and surface structure of
microspheres. (B) Laser particle size analysis showing microsphere size distribution. (C) FTIR spectral analysis of chemical structures of various components. (D) XRD
pattern analysis of crystalline phase structures of various components. (E) EDS elemental mapping showing spatial distribution of carbon (C), oxygen (O), calcium
(Ca), and phosphorus (P) within individual microspheres. (F) EDS spectrum with elemental composition showing weight percentages of detected elements. (G)
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) curves showing thermal degradation profiles of pure PLGA, GO, nHA, and composite microspheres from 25 ◦C to 800 ◦C under
nitrogen atmosphere.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
6

microspheres exhibited good spherical or near-spherical morphologies
with relatively smooth surfaces. Some microspheres showed a few
porous structures on their surfaces, which would favor subsequent cell
adhesion and nutrient exchange. Overall, the microsphere dispersion
was good, with no obvious agglomeration observed. Observation of
liquid nitrogen freeze-fractured microspheres revealed relatively dense
internal structures or porous network structures, depending on cross-
sectional positions.
Quantitative surface porosity analysis revealed that the majority of
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres possessed substantial
surface porosity. Low-magnification SEM counting (n = 150) showed
that 92.0 ± 2.0 % of microspheres displayed ≥1 μm surface pores. High-
magnification analysis yielded a projected porosity of 34.8 ± 2.1 % and
an average surface pore diameter of 4.9 ± 0.5 μm. This porous surface
structure facilitates controlled drug release while providing pathways
for nutrient and metabolite transport.
Laser particle size analysis results showed (Fig. 1B) that CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres had an average particle diam­
eter of 51.15 ± 0.40 μm with a Polydispersity Index (PDI) of 0.41,
indicating moderate size distribution uniformity suitable for pharma­
ceutical applications.
3.1.2. Chemical structure and phase composition of microspheres
To investigate interactions between drugs and polymers, FTIR was
performed on optimized formulation microspheres and spectra were
compared with those of PLGA, nHA, and GO. FT-IR spectral analysis
results are shown in Fig. 1C. PLGA characteristic absorption peaks such
as C=O stretching vibration peak (approximately 1760 cm−1) and C-O-C
stretching vibration peak (approximately 1080–1180 cm−1) were
clearly visible. nHA characteristic absorption peaks including PO4
3−
group stretching vibration peaks (approximately 1030–1090 cm−1 and
962 cm−1), bending vibration peaks (approximately 560–600 cm−1),
and -OH stretching vibration peak (approximately 3400–3500 cm−1)
were also evident. GO showed -OH stretching vibration (approximately
3417 cm−1), C=O stretching vibration (carboxyl or ketone groups,
approximately 1735 cm−1), and C-O stretching vibration (epoxy or hy­
droxyl groups, approximately 1050–1250 cm−1) characteristic peaks.
In composite microsphere FT-IR spectra, main characteristic peaks of
PLGA, nHA, and GO were observed individually, and weak signals of
CGRP amide I band (approximately 1650 cm−1) and amide II band
(approximately 1540 cm−1) might appear or overlap with other peaks,
indicating successful CGRP encapsulation in composite microspheres
while maintaining main chemical structures of each component during
physical mixing without obvious chemical bond destruction or new
chemical bond formation.
XRD pattern analysis is shown in Fig. 1D. Pure nHA powder dis­
played typical hydroxyapatite crystalline phase characteristic diffrac­
tion peaks, such as at 2θ = 25.8◦(002), 31.8◦(211), 36.0◦(202), 39.9◦
(310), 46.8◦(222). PLGA, due to its amorphous nature, showed a broad
diffuse peak in the 2θ = 15–25◦range. GO showed its characteristic
(001) diffraction peak at approximately 2θ 10–12◦. In composite
microsphere XRD patterns, nHA characteristic crystal diffraction peaks
were clearly observed, indicating that nHA maintained good crystal­
linity during composite processes, which was important for exerting
bioactivity and providing mechanical support. Meanwhile, PLGA
amorphous peaks and GO characteristic peaks were also present but
slightly shifted, possibly due to mixing with multiple amorphous sub­
stances. These results confirmed that composite microspheres were
successfully formed by PLGA, nHA, and GO composition, and CGRP
encapsulation did not significantly alter main carrier material crystal­
line phase structures.
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis provided direct
evidence of uniform nanoparticle distribution within the composite
microspheres (Fig. 1E and F). Elemental mapping revealed homoge­
neous distribution of carbon (C, green), oxygen (O, red), calcium (Ca,
purple), and phosphorus (P, cyan) throughout individual microspheres,
confirming successful incorporation of both nHA and GO components.
Thermogravimetric analysis provided quantitative validation of
nanoparticle incorporation and retention within the composite micro­
spheres (Fig. 1G). CGRP-loaded microspheres retained 20.38 ± 0.15 wt
% residue at 800 ◦C. After subtracting the 1.14 wt% carbonaceous res­
idue attributable to PLGA degradation, the measured nHA + GO residue
was 19.24 wt%, corresponding to a nanoparticle retention efficiency of
96.5 %. This value agrees closely with the theoretical 19.93 wt%
calculated from the feed ratio, confirming that nanoparticle detachment
during microsphere formation is minimal and that both nHA and GO
remain well-integrated within the polymer matrix.
3.1.3. CGRP encapsulation efficiency and drug loading
CGRP encapsulation efficiency (EE) and drug loading (DL) in CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres were determined using ELISA
method. Results showed that composite microspheres prepared by
optimized double emulsion-solvent evaporation method achieved CGRP
EE of 86.14 ± 2.5 % (n = 3) and DL of 8.44 ± 0.25 % (n = 3). High
encapsulation efficiency and drug loading indicated that the W/O/W
double emulsion-solvent evaporation method could effectively encap­
sulate hydrophilic CGRP peptides uniformly in PLGA/nHA/GO com­
posite matrices while reducing drug loss during preparation processes.
3.2. In vitro CGRP release and Degradation Characteristics of CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres
3.2.1. In vitro CGRP release curves
Composite microsphere in vitro CGRP cumulative release curves in
simulated physiological fluid environment (PBS, pH 7.4, 37 ◦C) are
shown in Fig. 2A. Release processes exhibited typical multi-phase
release patterns. In the initial 0.5–24 h, approximately 9.25 ± 0.47 %
(n = 3) CGRP was rapidly released, possibly attributed to rapid disso­
lution of drugs adsorbed on microsphere surfaces or near-surface layers
(initial burst release). Subsequent 1–28 days represented a sustained,
relatively gradual drug release phase, with CGRP diffusing at slower
rates from microsphere matrix pores and degradation-generated chan­
nels. After 28–42 days, drug release approached plateau phase, indi­
cating most releasable CGRP had been released. By day 42, total
cumulative CGRP release reached 90.53 ± 2.41 % (n = 3).
This characteristic of initial rapid release followed by long-term
sustained slow release could meet early rapid efficacy requirements
while providing stable CGRP concentrations for subsequent long-term
bone repair processes, which was important for exerting CGRP biolog­
ical effects. Sustained drug release was closely related to PLGA matrix
degradation behavior.
3.2.2. In vitro microsphere degradation behavior
In vitro degradation behavior of composite microspheres in PBS so­
lution containing protease XIV was evaluated through mass loss rates
and SEM morphological observation. As shown in Fig. 2B, microspheres
exhibited gradual mass loss during 42-day degradation cycles. In early
degradation stages (1–7 days), microsphere weight loss was relatively
slow, with weight loss ratio of approximately 11.89 ± 1.39 % (n = 3) on
day 7. As degradation time extended (14–42 days), microspheres
entered accelerated weight loss stages, with weight loss ratio reaching
74.11 ± 2.36 % (n = 3) on day 42.
SEM photographs (Fig. 2C) directly showed microsphere morpho­
logical changes during degradation processes: initial microspheres had
smooth, intact surfaces; as degradation progressed (after 14 days),
microsphere surfaces began showing holes and erosion traces; in late
degradation stages (35–42 days), microsphere structures underwent
obvious collapse and fragmentation, forming large-scale holes, indi­
cating significant hydrolysis and enzymatic degradation of PLGA
matrices. nHA and GO as composite material components might affect
overall microsphere degradation rates and patterns, such as nHA release
and GO sheet exposure. This controllable degradation behavior matched
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
7

sustained drug release characteristics and represented important con­
siderations for designing long-acting drug delivery systems.
3.3. In vitro cell studies
3.3.1. Biocompatibility
CCK-8 method was used to detect cytotoxicity of different concen­
trations of PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere extracts on rBMSCs,
with results shown in Fig. 3A. After co-culture with PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere extracts at concentrations from 5 % to 100 % (v/v) for 1, 3,
5, and 7 days, rBMSC OD values in all concentration groups showed no
statistically significant differences compared to control groups con­
taining only complete culture medium (P > 0.05), indicating good
biocompatibility of blank microsphere extracts. These results demon­
strated that PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres and their degra­
dation products showed no obvious cytotoxicity to rBMSCs within tested
concentration ranges, possessing good biocompatibility and providing
foundations for subsequent cell function experiments and in vivo
applications.
3.3.2. Cell proliferation and morphology
Calcein AM/PI dual staining results (Fig. 3C) analysis found that
after co-culture for 1 and 3 days, compared to control groups, free CGRP
solution groups, PLGA/nHA/GO blank microsphere groups, and CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere groups all showed significant
differences in cell survival rates. Among them, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
composite microsphere groups showed higher Calcein AM green fluo­
rescence signals (live cells) and lower PI red fluorescence signals (dead
cells) at both time points, indicating this group could significantly pro­
mote cell survival and reduce cell apoptosis, superior to free CGRP
solution groups and blank microsphere groups. Additionally, as culture
time extended to 3 days, composite microsphere group survival-
promoting effects became more obvious, suggesting sustained CGRP
release potential for more effectively maintaining cell activity.
Through in-depth observation of cell morphological changes via cell
adhesion and cytoskeleton staining, Phalloidin/DAPI fluorescence
staining results (Fig. 3D) showed that after 1 and 3 days of culture,
compared to PLGA/nHA/GO blank microsphere groups and free CGRP
solution groups, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere group
cells exhibited more sufficient spreading, more extended cell body
expansion, and formation of more pseudopodia and filopodial struc­
tures. Intracellular cytoskeletal protein F-actin microfilament bundles in
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO group cells appeared clearer and more robust,
tending to arrange orderly along cell long-axis directions, forming good
intracellular tension structures. These phenomena suggested that CGRP
continuously released by CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres might
improve cell-material surface interactions through specific molecular
mechanisms, significantly promoting cell adhesion and spreading be­
haviors crucial for subsequent cell function performance.
Quantitative detection of cell proliferation capacity through CCK-8
method, cell proliferation curves shown in Fig. 3B indicated that
compared to control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO blank microsphere
groups, free CGRP solution groups and CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite
microsphere groups could significantly promote rBMSC proliferation
activity (P < 0.05). This proliferation-promoting effect was particularly
obvious on culture days 3, 5, and 7. Notably, in later culture stages (such
as days 5 and 7), CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere group
proliferation-promoting effects were even superior to free CGRP solu­
tion groups. This fully demonstrated unique advantages of CGRP
sustained-release systems in maintaining long-term, stable cellular
Fig. 2. In Vitro Release and Degradation Characteristics of CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO Composite Microspheres (A) In vitro CGRP cumulative release curves (n =
3); (B) In vitro microsphere degradation mass loss rates (n = 3); (C) SEM morphological changes of microspheres at different degradation time points.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
8

Fig. 3. Biocompatibility, Cellular Effects, and Apoptosis Analysis (A) CCK-8 cytotoxicity assessment of different concentration microsphere extracts on BMSCs
over 7 days (n = 3). (B) CCK-8 cell proliferation assay showing proliferation capacity of BMSCs treated with different groups over 7 days (n = 3). (C) Calcein AM/PI
dual staining showing cell viability at 1 and 3 days post-treatment. Live cells display green fluorescence (Calcein AM) while dead cells show red fluorescence (PI).
Scale bar: 50 μm. (D) Phalloidin-FITC/DAPI staining showing F-actin cytoskeleton (green) and nuclei (blue) at 1 and 3 days post-treatment. Scale bar: 50 μm. (E)
Annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining flow cytometry analysis of BMSC apoptosis after 24h and 48h treatment with different experimental groups. (F) Quantitative
analysis of apoptotic cell percentages from flow cytometry data (n = 3).
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
9

biological effects.
3.3.3. Cell Apoptosis Analysis
Quantitative analysis of cell apoptosis/necrosis status through flow
cytometry (Annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining) (Fig. 3E and F) showed
that compared to control groups, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite
microsphere group rBMSCs showed significantly reduced apoptotic cell
proportions after co-culture for 24h (10.55 ± 0.40 % vs 31.33 ± 0.9 %,
P < 0.05) and 48h (15.68 ± 0.92 % vs 41.43 ± 1.53 %, P < 0.05),
indicating this group could effectively inhibit cell apoptosis and main­
tain cell activity. At 24h, free CGRP solution groups showed certain anti-
apoptotic effects compared to control groups (17.17 ± 0.54 % vs 31.33
± 0.91 %, P < 0.05), but effects were weaker than composite micro­
sphere groups, suggesting free CGRP might have shorter action time due
to rapid degradation. Overall, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite micro­
spheres significantly enhanced rBMSC survival capacity and reduced
apoptosis through sustained CGRP release, superior to free drugs and
blank carriers, demonstrating good biocompatibility and drug delivery
advantages.
3.3.4. Effects of composite microspheres on rBMSC migration capacity
Scratch healing assay results (Fig. 4A and B) indicated that at 12 and
Fig. 4. Cell Migration and Osteogenic Differentiation Assessment (A) Scratch wound healing assay showing cell migration into the wound area at 0, 12, and 24 h
post-scratching. Scale bar: 100 μm. (B) Quantitative analysis of scratch wound closure percentage over time (n = 3). (C) Transwell migration assay showing migrated
cells (stained with crystal violet) after 24h incubation. Scale bar: 100 μm. (D) Quantitative analysis showing number of migrated cells per high-power field (n = 3).
(E) Alizarin Red S staining showing calcium deposition and mineralized nodule formation at 14 and 21 days of osteogenic culture. Orange-red staining indicates
calcium deposits. Scale bar: 100 μm. (F) Quantitative analysis of Alizarin Red S staining by cetylpyridinium chloride extraction, expressed as μg Alizarin Red S per
well (n = 3). (G) BCIP/NBT alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining showing ALP activity at 4 and 7 days of osteogenic culture. Purple-blue precipitates indicate ALP-
positive areas. Scale bar: 50 μm. (H) Quantitative ALP activity measurement normalized to total protein content, expressed as U/mg protein (n = 3).
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
10

24 h post-scratching, compared to control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere groups, free CGRP solution groups and CGRP-PLGA/nHA/
GO composite microsphere groups could significantly accelerate rBMSC
coverage and healing of scratch areas (P < 0.05). CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
composite microsphere group scratch healing rates were slightly supe­
rior to free CGRP groups (31.79 ± 2.91 % vs 23.75 ± 1.27 %), further
confirming
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere
cell
migration-
promoting capacity.
Transwell chamber method evaluation results (Fig. 4C and D)
showed that compared to control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO micro­
spheres, free CGRP solution groups and CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO com­
posite microsphere groups could significantly promote rBMSC migration
toward Transwell lower chambers (P < 0.05). Among them, CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere group induced cell migration
numbers were slightly superior to free CGRP groups (442.00 ± 20.42 vs
383.00 ± 19.67), demonstrating sustained-release CGRP chemot actic
potential.
3.3.5. Osteogenic property assessment
3.3.5.1. Alizarin Red staining and mineralization quantification. Alizarin
Red S staining was used to detect calcified nodule formation in late-stage
osteogenic differentiation extracellular matrix. After 14 and 21 days of
culture, results (Fig. 4E) showed that compared to control groups and
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups, free CGRP solution groups and
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere group rBMSCs formed
more numerous and larger orange-red calcified nodules. CGRP-PLGA/
nHA/GO composite microsphere group mineralization levels were
significantly superior to control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere
groups. In contrast, free CGRP groups showed certain pro-mineralization
effects but weaker than composite microsphere groups, possibly related
to rapid CGRP release and degradation; while blank microsphere groups
showed only baseline levels of calcium deposition, indicating limited
direct effects of PLGA/nHA/GO itself on osteogenic differentiation.
Quantitative analysis confirmed these observations (Fig. 4F). At day
14, control cultures deposited only 9.6 ± 0.5 μg/well of mineralized
matrix, while blank microspheres and free CGRP solution increased
calcium deposition to 16.8 ± 0.8 and 25.2 ± 1.0 μg/well, respectively.
CGRP-loaded microspheres demonstrated the most prominent mineral­
ization effect, achieving 36.0 ± 0.9 μg/well, representing approximately
2.8-fold enhancement over controls (p < 0.001). By day 21, minerali­
zation continued to progress with CGRP-loaded microspheres reaching
54.0 ± 0.5 μg/well, significantly exceeding free CGRP (38.0 ± 0.9 μg/
well) and blank microspheres (27.2 ± 0.8 μg/well), corresponding to
3.6-fold increase compared to controls (p < 0.001).
3.3.5.2. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) detection and activity quantification.
Under osteogenic induction culture conditions, ALP was an important
early-stage osteoblast differentiation marker. ALP staining results
(Fig. 4G) showed that after 4 and 7 days of culture, compared to control
groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups, free CGRP solution
groups and CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microsphere group
rBMSCs exhibited deeper and more extensive ALP-positive staining
(purple-blue precipitates), indicating these groups could more effec­
tively promote early osteogenic differentiation of rBMSCs. Composite
microsphere group ALP expression levels at both 4 and 7 days of culture
were significantly higher than other groups, and differentiation-
promoting advantages became more significant with time extension.
In contrast, free CGRP groups showed certain ALP activity enhancement
effects but weaker than composite microsphere groups, possibly related
to short-term CGRP actions; while blank microsphere group ALP activity
was close to control groups, indicating limited direct effects of materials
themselves on early osteogenic differentiation.
Quantitative ALP activity measurements provided robust statistical
evidence for these observations (Fig. 4H). At day 4, control group ALP
activity was 0.81 ± 0.03 U/mg protein, while blank PLGA/nHA/GO
microspheres, free CGRP solution, and CGRP-loaded microspheres
significantly increased enzymatic activity to 1.59 ± 0.04, 2.20 ± 0.07,
and 3.01 ± 0.06 U/mg protein, respectively. CGRP-loaded microspheres
demonstrated approximately 3.7-fold enhancement compared to con­
trols (p < 0.001). By day 7, ALP activity further increased across all
treatment groups, with CGRP-loaded microspheres reaching 5.22 ±
0.10 U/mg protein, significantly higher than blank microspheres (2.62
± 0.08 U/mg protein) and free CGRP solution (3.82 ± 0.09 U/mg pro­
tein, p < 0.001). The sustained-release CGRP microspheres consistently
outperformed equivalent doses of free CGRP, highlighting the advan­
tages of controlled drug delivery.
These results confirmed that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite mi­
crospheres could significantly enhance early osteogenic differentiation
capacity of rBMSCs through sustained CGRP release, further supporting
their application potential in bone regeneration fields.
3.4. Molecular mechanisms of composite microspheres regulating rBMSC
osteogenic differentiation through cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway
3.4.1. cAMP concentration detection
The ELISA results (Fig. 5A) revealed that, compared with the control
and PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres, the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite
microspheres significantly elevated the intracellular cAMP concentra­
tions in rBMSCs (P < 0.05). The free CGRP solution also significantly
elevated the cAMP concentration. These results indicate that CGRP
released by CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres could serve as a first
messenger, effectively activating the production of cAMP as an intra­
cellular second messenger.
3.4.2. qRT-PCR analysis
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which CGRP-PLGA/nHA/
GO composite microspheres regulate rBMSC osteogenic differentiation,
the mRNA expression levels of osteogenic-related transcription factors
and marker genes, as well as PKA pathway downstream effector
CyclinD1, were detected. qRT-PCR results (Fig. 5E) showed that after 7
days of osteogenic induction culture, compared to control groups and
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite
microsphere groups significantly upregulated expression of key osteo­
genic transcription factors Runx2 and Osx, as well as late-stage osteo­
genic marker genes OPN (Spp1) and OCN (Bglap) (P < 0.05).
Meanwhile, cell proliferation-related CyclinD1 gene expression was also
significantly upregulated (P < 0.05). These results suggested that CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres might activate PKA signaling pathways,
thereby regulating transcription of downstream osteogenic-related
genes and cell cycle-related genes, promoting rBMSC osteogenic differ­
entiation and proliferation.
3.4.3. Western Blot analysis
To verify PKA signaling pathway activation and its effects on
downstream osteogenic protein expression at protein levels, Western
Blot analysis was performed (Fig. 5B–D). After treating BMSCs (30 min
for phosphorylated proteins, 7 days for total proteins), compared to
control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups, CGRP-PLGA/
nHA/GO composite microsphere groups significantly increased PKA
phosphorylation levels (p-PKA Thr197/Total PKA ratio elevation) and
downstream key substrate CREB phosphorylation levels (p-CREB
Ser133/Total CREB ratio elevation) (P < 0.05). Meanwhile, osteogenic-
related proteins Runx2, Osx, OPN, OCN, and cell cycle protein CyclinD1
expression levels were all significantly upregulated (P < 0.05) (Fig. 5F
and G).
These protein-level evidence strongly demonstrated that CGRP
released by CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres primarily
upregulated osteogenic-related protein expression through activating
cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathways, thereby promoting rBMSC oste­
ogenic differentiation. Multiple in vitro experimental results including
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
11

proliferation, apoptosis, ALP activity, mineralization, gene and protein
expression provided solid evidence chains for CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microspheres exerting pro-osteogenic and pro-proliferative effects
through CGRP-activated cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathways.
3.5. In vivo experimental results
3.5.1. Gross Specimen Observation and X-ray assessment
The gross observation of the femoral specimens collected at the
consolidation periods (Fig. 6B) revealed that all groups exhibited vary­
ing degrees of healing in distraction gaps over time. By consolidation
week 6, control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups still
presented obvious depressions or fibrous tissue connections in
Fig. 5. Molecular Mechanism Analysis (A) Intracellular cAMP concentration measured by ELISA after 30 min of treatment, normalized to total protein content (n
= 3). (B–D) Western blot analysis and quantitative assessment of PKA and CREB phosphorylation levels. (B) Representative Western blot images showing p-PKA
(Thr197), total PKA, p-CREB (Ser133), total CREB, and GAPDH expression. (C) Quantitative analysis of p-PKA/total PKA ratio. (D) Quantitative analysis of p-CREB/
total CREB ratio. (E) qRT-PCR analysis of osteogenic-related gene mRNA expression after 7 days of osteogenic induction. Relative expression levels of Runx2, Osx,
OPN (Spp1), OCN (Bglap), and CyclinD1 normalized to Gapdh internal control using 2^-ΔΔCt^ method (n = 3). (F) Representative Western blot images showing
expression of osteogenic proteins Runx2, Osx, OPN, OCN, CyclinD1, and GAPDH loading control. (G) Quantitative analysis of protein expression levels normalized to
GAPDH (n = 3).
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
12

distraction gaps with discontinuous new bone formation. CGRP solution
group showed improved healing, but still with incomplete bone bridges
or insufficient bone callus. CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group
distraction gaps were almost completely filled with hard new bone tis­
sue, with good bone bridge formation, relatively smooth surfaces, and
tight connections with surrounding host bone.
The dynamic X-ray observation results (Fig. 6A) were consistent with
the gross observation trends. At consolidation week 2, the control and
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups presented only small amounts of
vague bone callus shadows within the distraction gap, with clearly
visible gaps. In contrast, the CGRP solution group presented small
amounts of new bone callus with a slightly greater density than that in
the first two groups. Compared with the CGRP solution group, the CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group presented more abundant new bone
callus shadows within the distraction gap, with a greater density, and
the distraction gap began to show blurring.
Entering consolidation week 4, the control and PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere groups still presented relatively small amounts of bone
callus, with a low bone density and an obvious distraction gap. In the
CGRP solution group, the amount and density of bone callus were
increased, but the distraction gap was still partially visible. The CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups presented significant advantages
at this stage, with substantially greater amounts of bone callus, a
significantly elevated density, effective filling of most distraction gaps
with new bone, and initial bone continuity formation.
By consolidation completion at week 6, the control and PLGA/nHA/
GO microsphere groups failed to achieve complete distraction gap
healing, with X-ray images showing partial areas as fibrous connections
or only small amounts of immature bone callus formation. Compared
with the control group, the CGRP solution group showed superior bone
healing, but small residual gaps or areas of insufficient bone density
were still observed. In sharp contrast, in the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere group, the distraction gap was basically filled with
mature, well-bridged bone callus, with high new bone density, relatively
clear trabecular structures, and some degree of medullary canal recan­
alization, demonstrating excellent overall bone healing effects.
3.5.2. Micro-CT analysis results
At week 6, after the completion of the consolidation period, three-
dimensional micro-CT reconstruction and quantitative analysis of new
bone in the femoral distraction area of the rats in each group (Fig. 7A
and B) were performed. Three-dimensional reconstruction images
directly showed that control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere
groups still had obvious bone defects in distraction areas with sparse
new bone amounts and poor bone continuity. CGRP solution group new
bone amounts increased compared to the first two groups but bone
structures might still be insufficiently dense and complete. CGRP-PLGA/
nHA/GO microsphere groups showed the most ideal bone regeneration
effects, with most abundant new bone amounts in distraction areas,
dense and well-connected trabecular structures, forming relatively
complete and solid bone bridges with better medullary canal
recanalization.
Further quantitative parameter analysis revealed significantly
greater bone mineral density (BMD) in the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere group than in the control, PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere,
and CGRP solution groups (P < 0.05). CGRP solution group BMD values
were also significantly higher than control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere groups (P < 0.05). In bone volume fraction (BV/TV) as­
pects, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group BV/TV values were
similarly significantly higher than all other three groups (P < 0.05),
while CGRP solution group BV/TV values were also significantly supe­
rior to control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups (P <
0.05).
Additionally, with respect to other key parameters reflecting bone
microstructures, such as the trabecular number (Tb.N) and trabecular
thickness (Tb.Th), the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group pre­
sented significant advantages over the other groups, with significantly
greater Tb.N and Tb.Th values (P < 0.05); With respect to trabecular
separation (Tb.Sp), the Tb.Sp values in the CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere group were significantly lower than those in the other
groups (P < 0.05), indicating denser new bone structures with smaller
trabecular spacing. These comprehensive Micro-CT assessment results
from three-dimensional structure and bone mass levels further power­
fully confirmed that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres
could significantly promote high-quality new bone formation and
effective mineralization during distraction osteogenesis processes in
vivo.
3.5.3. Biomechanical performance evaluation
At week 6 after consolidation period completion, three-point
bending tests were performed on regenerated femurs from each group
to assess mechanical strength (Fig. 7C). Experimental results showed
that ultimate loads that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group re­
generated femurs could withstand were significantly higher than control
groups, PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups, and CGRP solution groups
(P < 0.05). CGRP solution group ultimate loads were also significantly
higher than control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups (P
< 0.05). Regarding material toughness indicators, namely energy to
failure, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups also showed signifi­
cant superiority, with values significantly higher than other groups (P <
Fig. 6. In Vivo Distraction Osteogenesis X-ray and Gross Specimen Observation (A) X-rayimages at different time points showing bone callus formation in
distraction areas; (B) Gross specimen observation of distraction area healing at consolidation week 6.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
13

0.05), reflecting that their new bone could absorb more energy before
fracture occurrence. Additionally, stiffness values representing material
deformation resistance capacity were also significantly higher in CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups than the other three groups (P <
0.05).
These biomechanical testing results fully demonstrated that local
application of CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres could not
only effectively increase new bone amounts but more importantly could
significantly improve biomechanical performance, making them closer
to normal, healthy bone tissue in strength, stiffness, and toughness. This
was crucially important for achieving functional bone regeneration and
ensuring regenerated bone could withstand physiological loads with
Fig. 7. Micro-CT Analysis and Biomechanical Testing (A) Micro-CT three-dimensional reconstruction images of distraction areas at 6 weeks post-consolidation
showing bone regeneration patterns across treatment groups. (B) Quantitative micro-CT analysis of bone microstructural parameters including bone mineral density
(BMD), bone volume (BV), bone volume fraction (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), and trabecular separation (Tb.Sp) (n = 3). (C)
Biomechanical testing results showing ultimate load, energy to failure, and stiffness measured by three-point bending test (n = 3).
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
14

significant clinical implications.
3.5.4. Histological analysis
Histological staining results (Fig. 8) showed that at consolidation
week 6, through Von Kossa staining observation, control groups and
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups showed only small amounts of
irregularly distributed black mineralized deposits within distraction
areas, with most areas still occupied by unmineralized fibrous tissues.
CGRP solution group mineralized areas increased compared to the first
two groups but mineralized bone distribution might still be insuffi­
ciently continuous and uniform. In contrast, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere group distraction areas showed large amounts of dense
black mineralized bone tissues, forming continuous bone bridge struc­
tures with relatively mature trabecular morphology.
Masson’s trichrome and Goldner’s trichrome staining results further
confirmed these observations. These staining clearly showed that CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group new bone tissues were more mature,
with orderly arranged collagen fibers and uniformly distributed bone
cells, forming sharp contrasts with large amounts of fibrous tissues and
small amounts of immature osteoid matrices in control groups and
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere groups. CGRP solution group histological
performance was intermediate between these two. From trabecular
morphology perspectives, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO group trabeculae were
more robust with tighter inter-connections.
Through Safranin O-Fast Green staining observation, at early
experimental time points, distraction areas might show small amounts of
endochondral ossification signs. However, by consolidation completion
at week 6, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group distraction areas
showed almost no cartilage tissue remnants, mainly replaced by mature
lamellar bone structures, indicating high bone remodeling processes and
bone tissue maturity. In contrast, control groups and PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere groups might still have partial cartilage areas or
fibrocartilage tissues at this time.
3.5.5. Immunohistochemical staining
Immunohistochemical staining results (Fig. 9) showed that in new
bone tissues within distraction areas at consolidation weeks 4 or 6, key
osteogenic transcription factors Runx2 and Osterix (Osx) positive
expression levels in CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group new bone
areas (especially in active osteoblasts and young osteocytes) were
significantly higher than control groups, PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere
groups, and CGRP solution groups (P < 0.05). Similarly, as important
markers of bone matrix maturation and mineralization, osteopontin
(OPN) and osteocalcin (OCN) positive expression intensities in CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group new bone matrices and osteoblasts
were also significantly stronger than all other three groups (P < 0.05).
To further verify in vivo activation of cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling
pathways, immunohistochemical staining was performed for p-PKA and
p-CREB. Results showed that in CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere
group new bone areas, p-PKA and p-CREB positive staining levels were
significantly higher than control groups, PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere
groups, and CGRP solution groups (P < 0.05). These results were
consistent with in vitro Western Blot detected PKA and CREB phos­
phorylation level elevation trends, indicating that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/
GO microspheres could similarly activate PKA/CREB signaling path­
ways in vivo.
These comprehensive histological and immunohistochemical results
from cellular and tissue levels further powerfully confirmed that CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO composite microspheres could effectively promote high-
quality new bone formation during distraction osteogenesis processes,
with underlying mechanisms closely related to activating PKA/CREB
signaling pathways and significantly upregulating key osteogenic tran­
scription factor and bone matrix protein expression.
Fig. 8. Histological Staining Results Histological staining of distraction areas in each group: Von Kossa staining showing mineralized bone (black), Masson’s
trichrome staining showing collagen (blue) and muscle (red), Goldner’s trichrome staining differentiating mineralized bone, osteoid matrix, and cells. Scale bar: 200
μm, 50 μm.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
15

4. Discussion
The findings of this study on bone defect repair, particularly the
reconstruction of large bone defects, have always been a severe chal­
lenge faced by clinical orthopedic fields [1]. Distraction osteogenesis
(DO) technology induces bone regeneration through mechanical force
stimulation, providing an effective approach to solving this problem, but
its long treatment cycles and high complication rates still limit its clin­
ical application effects [7,8]. Therefore, developing bioactive materials
that can synergize with DO technology to accelerate new bone formation
and maturation has important research value and clinical prospects. This
study successfully constructed a calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP)-loaded
PLGA/nHA/GO
ternary
composite
microsphere
(CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO) and systematically evaluated its physicochem­
ical properties, in vitro biological effects, and its capacity and mecha­
nisms for promoting bone regeneration in DO models. Study results
showed that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres achieved high encap­
sulation efficiency, sustained CGRP release over 42 days, and superior
biocompatibility, establishing the foundation for their therapeutic effi­
cacy. In vitro studies revealed that CGRP microspheres significantly
enhanced rBMSC proliferation, migration capacity, and osteogenic dif­
ferentiation markers compared to controls and free CGRP. Most
importantly, in a rat femoral distraction-osteogenesis model the
CGRP-loaded microspheres markedly enhanced bone repair, yielding
higher bone-mineral density, greater ultimate load, and faster callus
formation than the control groups. Combined with the demonstrated
activation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway, these findings constitute a
substantial advance in bone-tissue-engineering strategies for complex
skeletal reconstruction.
The strategic selection and integration of PLGA, nHA, and GO com­
ponents was based on complementary functional requirements to
address CGRP’s primary pharmaceutical challenges. Our characteriza­
tion results confirmed successful composite formation with uniform
spherical morphology (approximately 51 μm diameter) and appropriate
physicochemical properties for injectable applications [33,34]. FTIR
and XRD analyses confirmed successful composition of three compo­
nents PLGA, nHA, and GO, and CGRP encapsulation processes did not
damage original chemical structures and nHA crystalline forms of each
component, which was crucial for maintaining material bioactivity [35,
36]. Drug encapsulation rate and loading results showed that W1/O/W
double emulsification methods could effectively encapsulate hydro­
philic peptide drugs CGRP in hydrophobic polymer matrices, achieving
satisfactory drug loading efficiency [33]. The observed release kinetics
showed sustained CGRP release for up to 42 days with initial rapid
release followed by slow sustained release characteristics, providing
temporal kinetics that align with the extended consolidation phase re­
quirements of distraction osteogenesis. This controllable release pattern
was particularly important for bone regeneration processes requiring
long-term regulation, while in vitro degradation experiments confirmed
good biodegradability consistent with PLGA characteristics [34,46].
Fig. 9. Immunohistochemical Staining Results Immunohistochemical staining and analysis of osteogenic-related proteins and signaling pathway markers in
distraction areas at consolidation weeks 2, 4 and 6. Staining for Runx2, Osterix (Osx), osteopontin (OPN), osteocalcin (OCN), phosphorylated PKA (p-PKA), and
phosphorylated CREB (p-CREB) across different treatment groups. Quantitative analysis shows positive staining area percentage (n = 3). Scale bar: 200 μm.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
16

Our systematic investigation of cellular responses provided crucial
insights into how CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres enhance bone
regeneration at the molecular level. The biocompatibility assessments
showed that different concentrations of microsphere extracts showed no
obvious cytotoxicity to rBMSCs, providing strong evidence for safety of
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres as bone repair materials [47].
Live/dead cell staining further confirmed good cell survival states in
cultures treated with CGRP microspheres [48]. Beyond biocompati­
bility, CGRP microspheres significantly promoted multiple biological
behaviors of rBMSCs through sustained CGRP release rather than direct
cell-material contact. Cell cytoskeleton staining experiments revealed
that CGRP microsphere treatments enhanced rBMSC spreading and
cytoskeletal organization, forming clearer and more organized F-actin
structures, likely due to sustained CGRP release improving cellular re­
sponses and promoting favorable cell morphology [49]. Cell prolifera­
tion studies demonstrated that CGRP microspheres could significantly
promote rBMSC proliferation, with long-term effects superior to equiv­
alent doses of free CGRP solutions, highlighting advantages of
sustained-release systems [50]. Additionally, CGRP microspheres
possessed anti-apoptotic effects, protecting rBMSC survival under
adverse environments [51].
The enhanced BMSC migration observed with CGRP microspheres in
both Transwell and scratch assays [52,53] likely involves multiple
complementary mechanisms beyond direct chemotaxis. CGRP-induced
activation of adenylyl cyclase and subsequent cAMP elevation can
modulate cytoskeletal dynamics through PKA-mediated phosphoryla­
tion of cytoskeletal regulatory proteins, enhancing cell motility and
directional migration [54]. Our cytoskeleton staining results showing
more extended cell body expansion and organized F-actin microfilament
bundles support this mechanistic interpretation. Additionally, CGRP’s
well-known vasodilatory effects may create favorable microenviron­
mental conditions that facilitate cell migration through improved
nutrient and oxygen availability [55]. The sustained CGRP release
profile appears crucial for maintaining these migration-promoting ef­
fects, as evidenced by the superior performance compared to bolus
CGRP administration.
In core osteogenic differentiation aspects, this study confirmed
through ALP activity detection/staining and Alizarin Red S staining that
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres could significantly promote early
and late osteogenic differentiation of rBMSCs, manifested as enhanced
ALP activity and increased calcified nodule formation [56,57]. qRT-PCR
and Western Blot results further revealed at molecular levels that
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres could significantly upregulate
expression of key osteogenic transcription factors Runx2 and Osx, as
well as late osteogenic markers OPN and OCN [14,21]. These results
were consistent with previous reports of CGRP directly promoting
osteoblast differentiation and function [22,23]. This study’s innovation
lay in combining CGRP with PLGA/nHA/GO composite carriers,
achieving effective CGRP sustained release and proving superiority of
this composite system in promoting BMSC osteogenic differentiation.
Osteoconductive properties of nHA and pro-osteogenic characteristics of
GO might produce synergistic effects with CGRP bioactivity, jointly
enhancing BMSC osteogenic potential [36,40].
To explore molecular mechanisms by which CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microspheres exerted pro-osteogenic effects, this study focused on
cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathways. Our investigations demonstrated
that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere treatments could significantly
increased intracellular cAMP concentrations in rBMSCs and subse­
quently upregulated p-PKA and p-CREB protein levels. This series of
molecular activations showed high consistency in timing and degree
with downstream osteogenic-related gene (Runx2, Osx, OPN, OCN) and
protein expression upregulation, as well as cell proliferation-related
gene (CyclinD1) upregulation. This strong correlation suggested that
cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling pathways might play key roles in CGRP-
PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere-mediated pro-osteogenic effects. CGRP as
a known G protein-coupled receptor agonist, with adenylyl cyclase
activation and cAMP elevation being its classical signal transduction
approaches [43,44]. This study’s results provided new evidence for this
classical pathway’s role in CGRP promoting BMSC osteogenic differen­
tiation. CyclinD1 as a key protein in cell cycle regulation, its expression
upregulation was consistent with enhanced cell proliferation capacity,
while CREB was one of the important upstream factors regulating
CyclinD1 transcription [42], further supporting PKA/CREB pathway
roles in CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere promoting cell proliferation.
In the most clinically translatable in vivo animal experiment portion,
this study used classical rat femoral distraction osteogenesis models to
comprehensively evaluate bone regeneration effects of CGRP-PLGA/
nHA/GO microspheres. X-ray and Micro-CT results both visually and
quantitatively showed that compared to control groups, blank micro­
sphere groups, and pure CGRP solution groups, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere groups could significantly promote new bone formation
within distraction gaps during DO consolidation periods, increase bone
mass, improve bone mineral density, and enhance trabecular micro­
structures, manifested as earlier bone callus bridging and denser bone
structures [6,24,58]. Biomechanical testing results further confirmed
that CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere-treated regenerated bone
possessed higher ultimate loads, failure energies, and stiffness, indi­
cating significantly improved mechanical performance closer to normal
bone strength and toughness [7,59]. Histological staining results
confirmed
radiological
and
mechanical
findings,
with
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group new bone tissues being more
mature, higher mineralization degrees, more orderly collagen arrange­
ments, and fewer cartilage components. Immunohistochemical staining
showed that key protein Runx2, Osx, OPN, OCN expression levels in
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group new bone areas were signifi­
cantly higher than other groups, highly consistent with in vitro molec­
ular
biology
detection
results,
further
confirming
that
CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microspheres promoted bone regeneration in
vivo through upregulating osteogenic-related factor expression [14,60].
Notably, CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere group demonstrated supe­
rior in vivo bone regeneration effects compared to pure CGRP solution
groups across multiple indicators, fully demonstrating the enormous
advantages of sustained-release systems in maintaining local effective
drug concentrations, extending drug action times, and improving
bioavailability.
The demonstrated efficacy suggests significant potential for clinical
translation, yet several important considerations must be addressed. The
injection-based delivery approach offers substantial advantages for
clinical implementation, as it can be easily integrated into existing
distraction osteogenesis protocols without requiring additional surgical
procedures. When compared to existing bone regeneration strategies,
CGRP microspheres offer distinct advantages in safety profile and
mechanism of action. Unlike BMP-2, which has been associated with
serious complications including ectopic bone formation, inflammatory
reactions, and potential malignancy risks, CGRP represents an endoge­
nous signaling molecule with well-established safety profiles [61]. The
dual anabolic and anti-catabolic effects of CGRP provide more balanced
bone remodeling compared to purely anabolic agents, potentially
resulting in better bone quality and reduced risk of complications.
However, translation from rat models to human applications requires
careful consideration of differences in bone remodeling rates, mechan­
ical loading patterns, and healing timescales [62].
This study’s findings were consistent with recent reports about
CGRP’s positive roles in bone metabolism and bone regeneration. For
example, Ye et al. research showed that degradable magnesium com­
bined with DO could synergistically stimulate bone tissue regeneration
through CGRP-FAK-VEGF signal axes [24]. Ma et al. research also
confirmed that CGRP could promote osteogenic differentiation of peri­
odontal ligament stem cells [22]. This study’s characteristics lay in
constructing novel CGRP ternary composite sustained-release micro­
spheres and systematically applying them to DO models while thor­
oughly exploring molecular mechanisms through which they regulated
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
17

BMSC functions via cAMP/PKA/CREB pathways. PLGA provided drug
sustained-release foundations, nHA enhanced osteoconductivity and
biocompatibility, while GO might further synergistically promote
osteogenesis through its unique physicochemical properties and bioac­
tivity [31,35,39]. This multi-component composite strategy provided
new ideas for constructing high-performance bone repair materials.
Although this study achieved some meaningful results, it also had
certain limitations. First, in mechanism exploration aspects, this study
mainly revealed strong correlations between CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO
microsphere pro-osteogenic effects and cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling
pathway activation, but due to not using inhibitors for intervention
experiments, direct causal relationships between the two could not be
established. In the future, PKA inhibitors (such as H89) or gene knock­
down (siRNA) approaches could be used to further verify pathway ne­
cessity. Second, CGRP’s mechanisms of action might also involve other
signaling pathways such as MAPK pathways [60], with possible cross­
talk between these pathways requiring more comprehensive mechanism
exploration in the future. Third, although rat DO models were classical
bone regeneration models, they still differed from human bone regen­
eration physiological processes, requiring larger animal models or even
clinical studies to verify CGRP-PLGA/nHA/GO microsphere effective­
ness and safety in the future. Additionally, specific roles of GO and
interaction mechanisms among CGRP, nHA, and GO were not fully
elucidated, warranting further research. The potential for immune re­
sponses to GO components requires thorough investigation through
longer-term studies [63]. Finally, specific degradation products of mi­
crospheres in vivo and their long-term safety require longer observation
periods, and questions about optimal dosing, dosing frequency, and
application effects in different bone defect models warrant further
exploration.
The promising outcomes warrant systematic advancement through
several research phases. Immediate priorities include comprehensive
dose-response optimization studies to determine minimum effective and
maximum safe doses of CGRP microspheres. Investigation of combina­
tion therapies, particularly with mechanical stimulation or other growth
factors, may yield synergistic effects that further enhance bone regen­
eration outcomes [64]. The development of personalized delivery ap­
proaches based on patient-specific factors such as age, bone quality, and
systemic health status represents an important avenue for optimizing
therapeutic efficacy. From a technical perspective, exploration of
alternative delivery vehicles or hybrid systems may offer advantages for
specific clinical applications.
A structured preclinical development pathway should include large
animal studies in sheep or goat distraction models to evaluate safety,
efficacy, and optimal dosing regimens while providing data on systemic
distribution and clearance of microsphere components [65]. Compre­
hensive toxicology studies must address potential long-term effects of all
components, following established guidelines for biotechnology prod­
ucts. Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) development of the micro­
sphere production process will be essential for ensuring consistent
quality and regulatory compliance. Additionally, development of com­
panion diagnostic approaches to monitor treatment response will facil­
itate clinical trial design and patient selection strategies.
This work contributes to the evolving paradigm of precision medi­
cine in orthopedic applications, where therapeutic interventions are
tailored to specific biological mechanisms and patient characteristics.
The successful integration of nanotechnology, sustained-release sys­
tems, and mechanistic understanding exemplifies the multidisciplinary
approach required for advancing complex tissue engineering challenges.
The insights into cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway regulation may have
broader applications beyond distraction osteogenesis, potentially
informing treatments for other bone disorders characterized by
impaired healing or remodeling [66]. Furthermore, the microsphere
platform could serve as a template for delivering other bioactive mole­
cules with similar pharmaceutical challenges, expanding its impact
beyond CGRP applications.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, this comprehensive study demonstrates the successful
development, characterization, and validation of a novel CGRP delivery
system that significantly enhances distraction osteogenesis through
well-characterized cellular and molecular mechanisms. The substantial
improvements in bone formation, mineralization, and biomechanical
properties, coupled with detailed mechanistic understanding of cAMP/
PKA/CREB pathway activation, establish a strong foundation for clinical
translation. While several limitations and challenges remain for
advancing this approach to human trials, the promising preclinical
outcomes and clear development pathway provide compelling justifi­
cation for continued development toward clinical implementation.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yimurang Hamiti: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Kai Liu: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology, Investi­
gation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Xin Yang: Writing – review &
editing, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
analysis. Sulong Wang: Validation, Resources, Investigation, Data
curation. Xiriaili Kadier: Validation, Software, Resources, Investiga­
tion. Aihemaitijiang Yusufu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision,
Resources,
Project
administration,
Funding
acquisition,
Conceptualization.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal experimental procedures were approved by the Animal
Ethics Committee of Xinjiang Medical University (Ethics approval
number: IACUC-JT-20231121-35) and were conducted in accordance
with the Guidelines for Laboratory Animal Care and Use.
Funding
This research was supported by the Tianshan Talent Technology
Innovation Leading Talent - High-Level Leading Talent Project [grant
number 2022TSYCLJ0026].
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Aihemaitijiang Yusufu reports financial support was provided by Tian­
shan Talent Technology Innovation Leading Talent - High-Level Leading
Talent Project. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2025.102181.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] R. Dimitriou, E. Jones, D. McGonagle, P.V. Giannoudis, Bone regeneration: current
concepts and future directions, BMC Med. 9 (2011) 66, https://doi.org/10.1186/
1741-7015-9-66.
[2] Y. Fillingham, J. Jacobs, Bone grafts and their substitutes, Bone Jt J 98-B (1 Suppl
A) (2016) 6–9, https://doi.org/10.1302/0301-620X.98B1.36350.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
18

[3] W. Wang, K.W.K. Yeung, Bone grafts and biomaterials substitutes for bone defect
repair: a review, Bioact. Mater. 2 (2017) 224–247, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bioactmat.2017.05.007.
[4] G.A. Ilizarov, The tension-stress effect on the genesis and growth of tissues. Part I.
The influence of stability of fixation and soft-tissue preservation, Clin. Orthop.
Relat. Res. 238 (1989) 249–281.
[5] G.A. Ilizarov, The tension-stress effect on the genesis and growth of tissues. Part II.
The influence of the rate and frequency of distraction, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 239
(1989) 263–285.
[6] Y. Liu, F. Cai, K. Liu, J. Liu, X. Zhang, A. Yusufu, Cyclic distraction-compression
dynamization technique enhances the bone formation during distraction
osteogenesis, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9 (2022) 810723, https://doi.org/
10.3389/fbioe.2021.810723.
[7] Y. Liu, J. Liu, F. Cai, K. Liu, X. Zhang, A. Yusufu, Hypoxia during the consolidation
phase of distraction osteogenesis promotes bone regeneration, Front. Physiol. 13
(2022) 804469, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2022.804469.
[8] P. Kostenuik, F.M. Mirza, Fracture healing physiology and the quest for therapies
for delayed healing and nonunion, J. Orthop. Res. 35 (2017) 213–223, https://doi.
org/10.1002/jor.23460.
[9] L. Kong, H.A. Li, Q. Kang, G. Li, An update to the advances in understanding
distraction histogenesis: from biological mechanisms to novel clinical applications,
Journal of Orthopaedic Translation 25 (2020) 3–10.
[10] D. Paley, Problems, obstacles, and complications of limb lengthening by the
Ilizarov technique, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 250 (1990) 81–104.
[11] M.F. Pittenger, A.M. Mackay, S.C. Beck, R.K. Jaiswal, R. Douglas, J.D. Mosca,
Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells, Science 284 (1999)
143–147, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.284.5411.143.
[12] T. Squillaro, G. Peluso, U. Galderisi, Clinical trials with mesenchymal stem cells: an
update, Cell Transplant. 25 (2016) 829–848, https://doi.org/10.3727/
096368915X689622.
[13] Q. Chen, P. Shou, C. Zheng, M. Jiang, G. Cao, Q. Yang, Fate decision of
mesenchymal stem cells: adipocytes or osteoblasts? Cell Death Differ. 23 (2016)
1128–1139, https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2015.168.
[14] F. Long, Building strong bones: molecular regulation of the osteoblast lineage, Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13 (2011) 27–38, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3254.
[15] L. Edvinsson, CGRP receptor antagonists and antibodies against CGRP and its
receptor in migraine treatment, Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 80 (2015) 193–199,
https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.12627.
[16] F.A. Russell, R. King, S.J. Smillie, X. Kodji, S.D. Brain, Calcitonin gene-related
peptide: physiology and pathophysiology, Physiol. Rev. 94 (2014) 1099–1142,
https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00034.2013.
[17] S. Iyengar, K.W. Johnson, M.H. Ossipov, S.K. Aurora, CGRP and the trigeminal
system in migraine, Headache 59 (2019) 659–681, https://doi.org/10.1111/
head.13529.
[18] B. Holzmann, Modulation of immune responses by the neuropeptide CGRP, Amino
Acids 45 (2013) 1–7, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-011-1161-2.
[19] A. Bjurholm, A. Kreicbergs, E. Brodin, M. Schultzberg, Substance P- and CGRP-
immunoreactive nerves in bone, Peptides 9 (1988) 165–171, https://doi.org/
10.1016/0196-9781(88)90023-x.
[20] H. He, J. Chai, S. Zhang, L. Ding, P. Yan, W. Du, Z. Yang, CGRP may regulate bone
metabolism through stimulating osteoblast differentiation and inhibiting osteoclast
formation, Mol. Med. Rep. 13 (2016) 3977–3984, https://doi.org/10.3892/
mmr.2016.5023.
[21] W. Liang, L. Li, X. Cui, Z. Tang, X. Wei, H. Pan, B. Li, Enhanced proliferation and
differentiation effects of a CGRP- and Sr-enriched calcium phosphate cement on
bone mesenchymal stem cells, J. Appl. Biomater. Funct. Mater. 14 (2016)
e431–e440, https://doi.org/10.5301/jabfm.5000295.
[22] K. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Li, C. Li, S. Tang, X. Qu, N. Feng, Y. Wu, The PERK-EIF2α-
ATF4 signaling branch regulates osteoblast differentiation and proliferation by
PTH, Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 316 (2019) E590–E604, https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpendo.00371.2018.
[23] L. Wang, X. Shi, R. Zhao, B.P. Halloran, D.J. Clark, C.R. Jacobs, W.S. Kingery,
Calcitonin-gene-related peptide stimulates stromal cell osteogenic differentiation
and inhibits RANKL induced NF-kappaB activation, osteoclastogenesis and bone
resorption, Bone 46 (2010) 1369–1379, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bone.2009.11.029.
[24] L. Ye, J. Xu, J. Mi, X. He, Q. Pan, L. Zheng, Biodegradable magnesium combined
with distraction osteogenesis synergistically stimulates bone tissue regeneration
via CGRP-FAK-VEGF signaling axis, Biomaterials 275 (2021) 120984, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.120984.
[25] Y. Wang, Z. Pan, Q. Wang, Y. Shu, Z. Tan, Y. Chen, J. He, J. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yan,
Sequential SDF-1/CGRP-releasing smart composite hydrogel promotes
osteoporotic fracture healing by targeting sensory nerve-regulated bone
remodeling, Mater. Today Bio 32 (2025) 101750, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mtbio.2025.101750.
[26] A.W. James, G. LaChaud, J. Shen, et al., A review of the clinical side effects of bone
morphogenetic protein-2, Tissue Eng., Part B 22 (4) (2016) 284–297.
[27] A.I. Caplan, D. Correa, PDGF in bone formation and regeneration: new insights into
a novel mechanism involving MSCs, J. Orthop. Res. 29 (12) (2011) 1795–1803.
[28] L. Xian, X. Wu, L. Pang, et al., Matrix IGF-1 maintains bone mass by activation of
mTOR in mesenchymal stem cells, Nat. Med. 18 (7) (2012) 1095–1101.
[29] L. Edvinsson, R. Ekman, I. Jansen, J. McCulloch, R. Uddman, Peptide-containing
nerve fibers in human cerebral arteries: immunocytochemistry,
radioimmunoassay, and in vitro pharmacology, Ann. Neurol. 21 (1987) 431–437,
https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410210503.
[30] A. Jamaluddin, C.L. Chuang, E.T. Williams, A. Siow, S.H. Yang, P.W.R. Harris,
others, Lipidated calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) peptide antagonists retain
CGRP receptor activity and attenuate CGRP action in vivo, Front. Pharmacol. 13
(2022) 832589, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.832589.
[31] H.K. Makadia, S.J. Siegel, Poly lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) as a biodegradable
controlled drug delivery carrier, Polymers 3 (2011) 1377–1397, https://doi.org/
10.3390/polym3031377.
[32] F. Danhier, E. Ansorena, J.M. Silva, R. Coco, A. Le Breton, V. Pr´eat, PLGA-based
nanoparticles: an overview of biomedical applications, J. Contr. Release 161
(2012) 505–522, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.01.043.
[33] I. Bala, S. Hariharan, M.N. Kumar, PLGA nanoparticles in drug delivery: the state of
the art, Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst. 21 (2004) 387–422, https://doi.org/
10.1615/critrevtherdrugcarriersyst.v21.i5.20.
[34] S. Fredenberg, M. Wahlgren, M. Reslow, A. Axelsson, The mechanisms of drug
release in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based drug delivery systems—a review, Int.
J. Pharm. 415 (2011) 34–52, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.05.049.
[35] M. Sadat-Shojai, M.T. Khorasani, E. Dinpanah-Khoshdargi, A. Jamshidi, Synthesis
methods for nanosized hydroxyapatite with diverse structures, Acta Biomater. 9
(2013) 7591–7621, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2013.04.012.
[36] H. Zhou, J. Lee, Nanoscale hydroxyapatite particles for bone tissue engineering,
Acta Biomater. 7 (2011) 2769–2781, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
actbio.2011.03.019.
[37] D.R. Dreyer, S. Park, C.W. Bielawski, R.S. Ruoff, The chemistry of graphene oxide,
Chem. Soc. Rev. 39 (2010) 228–240, https://doi.org/10.1039/b917103g.
[38] H. Shen, L. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, Biomedical applications of graphene,
Theranostics 2 (2012) 283–294, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.3642.
[39] W.C. Lee, C.H. Lim, H. Shi, L.A. Tang, Y. Wang, C.T. Lim, others, Origin of
enhanced stem cell growth and differentiation on graphene and graphene oxide,
ACS Nano 5 (2011) 7334–7341, https://doi.org/10.1021/nn202190c.
[40] H. Elkhenany, L. Amelse, A. Lafont, S. Bourdo, M. Caldwell, N. Neilsen, others,
Graphene nanoscaffolds for osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal
stem cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (2017) 36664–36675, https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.7b10888.
[41] P. Sassone-Corsi, The cyclic AMP pathway, Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol. 4
(2012) a011148, https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a011148.
[42] B. Mayr, M. Montminy, Transcriptional regulation by the phosphorylation-
dependent factor CREB, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2 (2001) 599–609, https://doi.
org/10.1038/35085068.
[43] I. Villa, R. Melzi, F. Pagani, F. Ravasi, A. Rubinacci, F. Guidobono, Effects of
calcitonin gene-related peptide and amylin on human osteoblast-like cells
proliferation, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 409 (2000) 273–278, https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0014-2999(00)00872-4.
[44] Y.L. Liang, M. Khoshouei, G. Deganutti, A. Glukhova, C. Koole, T.S. Peat, And
others. Cryo-EM structure of the active, Gs-protein complexed, human CGRP
receptor, Nature 561 (2018) 492–497, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0535-
y.
[45] S.C. Egea, I.M. Dickerson, Direct interactions between calcitonin-like receptor
(CLR) and CGRP-receptor component protein (RCP) regulate CGRP receptor
signaling, Endocrinology 153 (2012) 1850–1860, https://doi.org/10.1210/
en.2011-1459.
[46] M. Hazekawa, H. Kojima, T. Haraguchi, M. Yoshida, T. Uchida, Effect of self-
healing encapsulation on the initial burst release from PLGA microspheres
containing a long-acting prostacyclin agonist, ONO-1301, Chem. Pharm. Bull. 65
(2017) 653–659, https://doi.org/10.1248/cpb.c17-00025.
[47] L. Cai, X. Qin, Z. Xu, Y. Song, H. Jiang, Y. Wu, H. Ruan, J. Chen, Comparison of
cytotoxicity evaluation of anticancer drugs between real-time cell analysis and
CCK-8 method, ACS Omega 4 (2019) 12036–12042, https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsomega.9b01142.
[48] M.J. Stoddart, Cell viability assays: introduction, Methods Mol. Biol. 740 (2011)
1–6, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-61779-108-6_1.
[49] A. Abalymov, L. Van der Meeren, M. Saveleva, E. Prikhozhdenko, K. Dewettinck,
B. Parakhonskiy, A.G. Skirtach, Cells-grab-on particles: a novel approach to control
cell focal adhesion on hybrid thermally annealed hydrogels, ACS Biomater. Sci.
Eng. 6 (2020) 3933–3944, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.0c00119.
[50] M.V. Berridge, P.M. Herst, A.S. Tan, Tetrazolium dyes as tools in cell biology: new
insights into their cellular reduction, Biotechnol. Annu. Rev. 11 (2005) 127–152,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1387-2656(05)11004-7.
[51] I. Vermes, C. Haanen, H. Steffens-Nakken, C. Reutelingsperger, A novel assay for
apoptosis. Flow cytometric detection of phosphatidylserine expression on early
apoptotic cells using fluorescein labelled Annexin V, J. Immunol. Methods 184
(1995) 39–51, https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1759(95)00072-i.
[52] H.C. Chen, Boyden chamber assay, Methods Mol. Biol. 294 (2005) 15–22, https://
doi.org/10.1385/1-59259-860-9:015.
[53] C.C. Liang, A.Y. Park, J.L. Guan, In vitro scratch assay: a convenient and
inexpensive method for analysis of cell migration in vitro, Nat. Protoc. 2 (2007)
329–333, https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.30.
[54] A.K. Howe, Regulation of actin-based cell migration by cAMP/PKA, Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1692 (2–3) (2004) 159–174.
[55] S.D. Brain, A.D. Grant, Vascular actions of calcitonin gene-related peptide and
adrenomedullin, Physiol. Rev. 84 (3) (2004) 903–934.
[56] C.A. Gregory, W.G. Gunn, A. Peister, D.J. Prockop, An Alizarin red-based assay of
mineralization by adherent cells in culture: comparison with cetylpyridinium
chloride extraction, Anal. Biochem. 329 (2004) 77–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ab.2004.02.002.
[57] W. Chen, L. Ma, W. Sun, W. Xiao, H. Guo, J. Xiu, X. Jiang, CGRP promotes
osteogenic differentiation by regulating macrophage M2 polarization through
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
19

HDAC6/AKAP12 signaling pathway, Regen. Med. 19 (2024) 379–391, https://doi.
org/10.1080/17460751.2024.2370697.
[58] M.L. Bouxsein, S.K. Boyd, B.A. Christiansen, R.E. Guldberg, K.J. Jepsen, R. Müller,
Guidelines for assessment of bone microstructure in rodents using micro-computed
tomography, J. Bone Miner. Res. 25 (2010) 1468–1486, https://doi.org/10.1002/
jbmr.141.
[59] C.H. Turner, D.B. Burr, Basic biomechanical measurements of bone: a tutorial,
Bone 14 (1993) 595–608, https://doi.org/10.1016/8756-3282(93)90081-k.
[60] Y. Jiang, N. Xin, Y. Xiong, Y. Guo, Y. Yuan, Q. Zhang, P. Gong, αCGRP regulates
osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells through ERK1/
2 and p38 MAPK signaling pathways, Cell Transplant. 31 (2022)
9636897221107636, https://doi.org/10.1177/09636897221107636.
[61] E.J. Carragee, E.L. Hurwitz, B.K. Weiner, A critical review of recombinant human
bone morphogenetic protein-2 trials in spinal surgery, Spine J. 11 (6) (2011)
471–491.
[62] A.I. Pearce, R.G. Richards, S. Milz, et al., Animal models for implant biomaterial
research in bone: a review, Eur. Cell. Mater. 13 (2007) 1–10.
[63] L. Ou, B. Song, H. Liang, et al., Toxicity of graphene-family nanoparticles: a general
review of the origins and mechanisms, Part. Fibre Toxicol. 13 (1) (2016) 57.
[64] K.S. Kang, A.G. Robling, New insights into Wnt-Lrp5/6-β-catenin signaling in
mechanotransduction, Front. Endocrinol. 5 (2014) 246.
[65] L.A. Mills, A.H. Simpson, The relative incidence of fracture non-union in the
Scottish population (5.17 million): a 5-year epidemiological study, BMJ Open 3 (2)
(2013) e002276.
[66] M. Zaidi, Skeletal remodeling in health and disease, Nat. Med. 13 (7) (2007)
791–801.
Y. Hamiti et al.
Materials Today Bio 34 (2025) 102181
20