Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejps
Platelet lysate-loaded PLGA nanoparticles in a thermo-responsive hydrogel
intended for the treatment of wounds
Sergio Alberto Bernal-Cháveza,1, Sergio Alcalá-Alcaláb,1, Doris Cerecedoc,1,
Adriana Ganem-Ronderoa,1,⁎
a División de Estudios de Posgrado (Tecnología Farmacéutica), Facultad de Estudios Superiores Cuautitlán, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuautitlán Izcalli,
Estado de México 54740, México
b Laboratorio de Tecnología Farmacéutica, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México
c Laboratorio de Hematobiología, Escuela Nacional de Medicina y Homeopatía, Sección de Estudios de Posgrado, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México, México
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Platelet lysate
PLGA nanoparticles
Hydrogel
Thermo-responsive polymer
Pluronic F-127
Wound healing
A B S T R A C T
A thermo-responsive hydrogel of Pluronic F-127, containing PLGA nanoparticles loaded with a platelet lysate for
wound treatment, was prepared. A high rate of incorporation of the lysate (about 80%) in the nanoparticles was
achieved by the double emulsion-solvent evaporation method. The nanoparticles were characterized by mea-
suring their size (about 318 nm), polydispersity index (0.29) and Z potential (-17.6), as well as by infrared and
calorimetric techniques, and determining their stability as a function of time. It was found through measures of
transepidermal water loss that the hydrogel containing the nanoparticles was capable of providing a semi-
occlusive environment, necessary for the recovery of a wound. The inclusion of lysate in nanoparticles and this in
turn in the hydrogel allowed a gradual release, which would avoid contact of the total dose with the biological
medium. Studies with ﬁbroblasts and in vivo in mice showed that the hydrogel containing nanoparticles with
platelet lysate promoted faster tissue regeneration than the lysate in its free form, so this system is presented as a
good alternative for the treatment of wounds.
1. Introduction
Over the years, the prevalence of people with chronic wounds has
increased dramatically by a number of factors including smoking,
obesity, and chronic diseases such as diabetes, that can slow the healing
process of a wound and increase the risk of becoming chronic
(Chandika et al., 2015). A single diabetic ulcer, which usually becomes
a chronic wound, with all the consequences that this implies, costs
thousands of dollars to the health system, and the cost increases dra-
matically, considering that the number of aﬀected patients grows ex-
ponentially each year. This has resulted in the immense market for
wound healing, which does not stop growing year by year (Han and
Ceilley, 2017). In addition to the cost of wound care, current therapies
are far from guaranteeing adequate healing and recurrence is common.
Furthermore, many systems require frequent administrations and high
doses to achieve the desired eﬀect, with the possibility of undesirable
eﬀects if high systemic concentrations are reached (Chandika et al.,
2015). Because of this situation, the improvement of chronic wound
treatments has become such a necessity that the scientiﬁc community
has focused not only on developing new treatments but also on im-
proving the eﬀectiveness of current therapies (Gainza et al., 2015;
Chouhan et al., 2019). The wound healing process is a complex phy-
siological event involving several overlapping stages that include in-
ﬂammation, the formation of granulation tissue, re-epithelization, ma-
trix formation and remodeling (Barrientos et al., 2008). However, any
interruption or interference on these pathways, such as those caused by
intracellular and extracellular pH changes, as well as the increase in
enzyme and macrophage activity, among others, results in a non-
healing wound, turning the wound into chronic. In chronic wounds, the
physiological balance between tissue degradation and tissue reassembly
has been lost and catabolic process predominates (Percival et al., 2014).
The inﬂammation stage is characterized by an exudate coming from the
wound, with a high content of proteins, such as growth factors [GF:
transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1, platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), ﬁbroblast growth factor (FGF),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)], inﬂammatory components,
chemokines, cytokines (CK) and matrix molecules; moreover, it facil-
itates the ingress of white cells and provides the moist environment
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2020.105231
Received 20 September 2019; Received in revised form 28 December 2019; Accepted 20 January 2020
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ganemq@hotmail.com (A. Ganem-Rondero).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
Available online 31 January 2020
0928-0987/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T

important for healing (Cutting, 2003); Garcia-Orue et al., 2017. The
presence of proinﬂammatory cells creates a proteolytic microenviron-
ment, constituted for example by matrix metalloproteinases that facil-
itate extracellular matrix degradation, as well as the degradation of GF
and CK during the healing process. This decrease in GF and CK can
retard wound healing. Therefore, if they are externally administered
they would contribute to regenerate tissue growth (Gainza et al., 2015).
Platelet lysate (PL) is a blood product containing a plethora of growth-
promoting factors (GF), which has been studied and used since the
1970s (Shanskii et al., 2013). PL is widely recognized for the positive
eﬀects of GF on tissue repair and regeneration, vascular remodeling and
regulation of inﬂammatory and immune responses (Santo et al., 2015;
Dellera et al., 2014; Santo et al., 2012) and has been considered as a
safe and eﬃcient mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) culture supplement
for robust MSC cultivation (Fekete et al., 2012). Furthermore, PL is
known to stimulate the in vitro proliferation of chondrocytes (Santo
et al., 2015), ﬁbroblasts (Fontana et al., 2016) and the keratinocytes
migration (Ranzato et al., 2008). Since PL represents a natural source of
multiple GF, it avoids the need of including diﬀerent bioactive agents in
a delivery system. However, if PL is externally administered, it is dif-
ﬁcult to expect the desired biological eﬀect in vivo because of the short
half-life of GF. Furthermore, high doses and/or frequent administra-
tions will be required, which raises the issues of toxicity and costs.
Thus, it is indispensable for improved in vivo high eﬃcacy to achieve a
controlled PL delivery system (Gainza et al., 2015; Santo et al., 2012).
The use of polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery systems oﬀers
an interesting alternative in the area of dermal administration, espe-
cially for hydrophilic macromolecules such as GF (Gainza et al., 2015;
Garcia-Orue et al., 2017; Shekhter et al., 2015). These nanoparticles can
protect PL from the external environment of wounds and in addition
they are able to control its release. PLGA is one of the polymers that has
been most used as a GF carrier for wound treatment due to its bio-
compatibility and biodegradability (Gainza et al., 2015). A few con-
trolled release systems including PL have been developed. For example,
Santo et al. (2015, 2012) developed PL-loaded chitosan-chondroitin
sulfate nanoparticles for cartilage regeneration and as an osteogenic
supplement for bone tissue engineering. Likewise, a foam based on poly
(D,L-lactic acid), containing the same type of nanoparticles, but in this
case, to enhance the osteogenic diﬀerentiation of human adipose de-
rived stem cells (Santo et al., 2012). Few are the references that focus
on the healing of skin wounds using micro- and nanocarriers loaded
with PL. Fontana et al. (2016) created PL-modiﬁed porous silicon mi-
croparticles for the proliferation of cells in wounds. In all the cases
mentioned above, controlled release of PL was achieved.
Likewise, hydrogel (HG) dressings, based on smart polymers, can be
ideal platforms for the administration and retention of drugs to the skin.
In relation to thermo-sensitive HG, these have several advantages
(Gainza et al., 2015; Chouhan et al., 2019): i) They can be easily ap-
plied in the form of a solution, becoming a HG in situ at physiological
temperature; ii) they can adopt the exact shape of the wound, which
promotes intimate contact with the area, covering and protecting it; iii)
the use of adhesives, glues or sutures is not necessary; iv) maintain the
necessary moisture conditions for wound healing; v) they may con-
stitute semi-occlusive systems that allow an adequate gas exchange; vi)
contribute to the controlled release of the drug; vii) provide protection
to the drug; viii) they are easy to prepare. However, they also have
disadvantages such as low mechanical resistance, dilution with wound
ﬂuids and rapid drug release. That is why in this work the properties of
polymeric nanoparticles based on PLGA were combined with those of
thermo-sensitive Pluronic F-127® HG, seeking to achieve a better eﬀect
of PL on skin wounds. Therefore, a Pluronic F-127® HG containing
nanoparticles (NP) loaded with PL was developed, characterized and
evaluated through in vitro and in vivo tests, as a release system for
wound healing.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Poly (lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA 50:50, carboxylic end group)
was purchased from Evonik Industries (Darmstadt, Germany). Pluronic
F127® was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Low
viscosity
polyvinyl
alcohol
(PVA)
was
obtained
from
Silanes
Laboratories (CDMX, Mexico). PL was donated by Banco de Sangre,
Hospital Juárez de México, S.S. (CDMX, Mexico). Fibroblasts were
cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum, 400 mM L-glutamine, 50 μM gentamycin, 25 mM HEPES, 2 g/L
sodium bicarbonate, 1 mM sodium pyruvate in a humid atmosphere of
5% CO2 at 37 °C. Cell viability was assessed by exclusion of 0.2% trypan
blue and was routinely > 90%. Sodium hydroxide and potassium
monobasic phosphate were all supplied by Fermont (CDMX, Mexico).
All the solutions were prepared using water from a Milli-Q® ﬁltration
system (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).
2.2. Methods
2.2.1. Preparation and characterization of placebo nanoparticles (NP) and
PL-loaded nanoparticles (NP+PL)
Preparation of nanoparticles
Before preparing the nanoparticles, platelet lisate (PL) was character-
ized by techniques such as Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
(FTIR/ATR), circular dichroism (CD) and ultraviolet (UV) spectro-
photometry, as well as by the well-known reactions for proteins, using
the Bradford and Biuret reagents (the results of these tests can be found
in the supplementary material).
Both NP (placebo nanoparticles) and NP+PL (nanoparticles loaded
with platelet lysate) were prepared according to a previously optimized
process, based on a modiﬁed double emulsion-solvent evaporation
technique (Fonte et al., 2015), using PLGA as a biodegradable polymer.
Brieﬂy, 150 mg of PLGA were dissolved in 10 ml of dichloromethane,
adding dropwise 1 ml of phosphate buﬀer solution (PBS) for NP or 1 ml
of PL aqueous solution for the NP+PL, under constant homogenization
at 15,000 rpm during 5 min. This ﬁrst water in oil (W/O) emulsion was
then added to 30 ml of an aqueous solution of PVA (5% w/w) under the
same conditions of homogenization, obtaining the second emulsion (W/
O/W). Afterward, the solvent was evaporated at room temperature,
under magnetic stirring, getting the nanoparticles. Finally, the nano-
particle suspension was washed three times with 10 ml of deionized
water, removing the residual PVA by centrifugation at 12000 rpm using
a Hermle Z326 K centrifuge (Germany) for 45 min each. The nano-
particles were prepared by adding two amounts of PL, 2 mg and 8 mg,
keeping a PL:PLGA ratio of 1:75 and 1:19, respectively.
Particle size (PS), polydispersity index (PDI), Z potential (zP), encapsula-
tion eﬃciency (%EE), loading capacity (%LC) and morphology of nano-
particles
Both NP and NP+PL were characterized by measuring particle size
(PS), polydispersity index (PDI) and Z potential (zP), using a Zetasizer
Nano ZS90 (Malvern, Worcs, UK). PS and PDI were determined by the
dynamic light scattering technique, diluting the suspension of NP or NP
+LP with deionized water, using polystyrene cuvettes and a 90° angle.
For zP, the preparation was similar, using capillary polystyrene cuvettes
and performing the measurement by the electrophoretic light scattering
technique. The measurements were made in triplicate for each sample.
Encapsulation eﬃciency (%EE) and loading capacity (%LC) were
calculated using Eqn 1 and 2, respectively:
=
−
EE
Initial amount of PL
Amount of PL in the supernatant
Initial amount of PL
%
*100%
(1)
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
2

=
−
LC
Initial amount of PL
Amount of PL in the supernatant
Total weight of NP
%
*100%
(2)
Free PL (in the supernatant, including the three wash volumes) was
separated by centrifuging the NP+PL suspension at 12,000 rpm for
2.5 h, at 4 °C, using a Hermle Z326 K centrifuge (Germany).
Quantiﬁcation was carried out by UV spectrophotometry at 280 nm,
using a previously validated method (data shown in the supplementary
material).
The nanoparticles were visualized by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) using a JSM-7600F electron microscope. Samples were prepared
by spreading dropwise 25 μl of diluted nanoparticle suspension over a
copper grill, drying it at room temperature for 24 h.
Thermal behavior
The nanosystems and the individual components were frozen at −20 ºC
and were then lyophilized for 24 h at a temperature of −52 ºC and a
vacuum value of 0.450 mBar in a freeze dryer machine (Labconco
FreeZone 2.5, USA). Then, the thermal behavior was analyzed by
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) using a Q20 calorimeter (TA
Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA). Brieﬂy, 5 mg of each sample was
placed in a Tzero® aluminum pan (TA Instruments, Switzerland), car-
rying out the analysis under the following conditions: thermal equili-
brium at 20 °C, isotherm for 3 min and a thermal ramp of 10 °C/min
until 350 °C.
Attenuated total reﬂectance-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spec-
troscopy
Once dried by lyophilization, under the conditions set forth in the
previous section (Thermal Behavior), nanoparticles were placed on a
horizontal ATR zinc selenide cell, registering the infrared spectrum of
the nanosystems using an infrared equipment ABB-MB3000 FTIR
(Quebec, Canada). Measurements represented an average of 150 scans
with a resolution of 16. The infrared spectra for the raw materials of the
nanosystems were also obtained. Experiments were performed in tri-
plicate.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy
Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy analysis was performed in a J-815
Perkin-Elmer equipment (Jasco Inc., Easton, MD) by placing the sample
in a 1 mm cell. The analysis was carried out under the following con-
ditions: standard sensitivity, bandwidth of 1.00 nm, scan speed 10 nm/
min, temperature of 25 °C, wavelength from 250 to 195 nm, with in-
tervals of 0.5 nm, registering 110 points for reading. The study was
carried out for the PL solution, as well as for the suspension of nano-
particles and for the hydrogels. All systems had the same concentration
of PL.
Stability
A sample of 5 ml of each system (NP or NP+PL) was stored at
4.0 °C ± 0.1 °C, to avoid the instability problems inherent to PL. The
stability of the systems was assessed by measuring PS, PDI and zP using
the same techniques previously mentioned. Likewise, the PL released
from the NP+PL system was quantiﬁed in the supernatant after cen-
trifuging the samples at 12,000 rpm for 2.5 h, at 4 °C, using a Hermle
Z326 K centrifuge (Germany). Quantiﬁcation was carried out by UV
spectrophotometry at 280 nm (see supplementary material). Stability
studies were followed for 3 months. Experiments were performed in
triplicate.
Eﬀect of temperature and of wound ﬂuid on particle size (PS)
The eﬀect of both temperature and components of wound ﬂuid (WF)
on the nanosystems, was evaluated by measuring PS by dynamic light
scattering, according to the procedure described above. In the case of
temperature, a ramp from 20 °C to 65 °C was performed. Each mea-
surement was repeated three times for each sample (PL in solution, NP
and NP+PL). For the WF eﬀect, 1.0 ml of the nanosystem suspension
was exposed for 11 h to 0.3 ml of blood plasma, used as a WF simulator,
at 33 °C (average temperature of a wound) (Trengove et al., 1996;
Dini et al., 2015).
In vitro release of PL from NP
A volume of 1 ml of NP+PL suspension was placed inside a dialysis
membrane bag composed of Biotech Grade Cellulose Ester with a
MWCO of 1,000 kDa (Spectrum®Labs, San Francisco CA, USA). The bag
was immersed in 5 ml of PBS solution pH 7.2 at 33 °C, with constant
magnetic stirring. For comparison purposes, the release of PL from an
aqueous solution was studied. For this, 1 ml of solution containing an
amount of PL equivalent to that of the NP suspension was placed in the
dialysis bag. The total volume of the receptor medium was withdrawn
at pre-set times and it was analyzed by UV spectroscopy at 280 nm
(validation parameters presented in the supplementary material). The
test was performed in triplicate.
Eﬀect of free and encapsulated PL on a ﬁbroblast culture
In order to conﬁrm if PL maintained its biological activity once in-
corporated into the NP, in vitro studies were carried out in a culture of
dermal ﬁbroblasts (ATCC® PCS-201–012 Manassas, VA, USA). The
technique for this evaluation was the scratch assay [Liang et al., 2007],
which consisted of diametrically scratching the ﬁbroblast culture using
a plastic tip and thereby generating a cell-free space, in which the
formulation was placed. The progressive coating of this space by ﬁ-
broblasts was followed by sequential photographs. The study was
conducted by treating ﬁbroblasts with PBS solution, a solution of PL, a
NP suspension and the suspension of NP+PL, separately.
2.2.2. Inclusion of NP and NP+PL in a hydrogel
Preparation and characterization
Both NP and NP+PL were included in a thermosensitive polymeric
hydrogel (HG) based on Pluronic F-127®. The HG was prepared by the
cold method, dissolving a quantity of polymer, equivalent to 20% (w/
v), in deionized water at 4 °C under magnetic stirring. The polymer was
left to hydrate at that temperature for 24 h until a clear solution was
obtained. HGs containing NP or NP+PL were obtained by the same
procedure, replacing the deionized water with the NP (NP HG) or the
NP+PL suspension (NP+PL HG). Approximately 75 mg of NP are
contained in 100 ml of HG.
Hydrogel viscosity was measured using a Brookﬁeld CAP2000 + L
viscometer (Brookﬁeld Engineering Labs., Stoughton, MA, USA). A
volume of 50 μl of each hydrogel (HG, NP HG and NP+PL HG) was
placed on the ﬂat plate of the equipment. A viscosity proﬁle versus
temperature (from 5 °C to 40 °C) with a ramp of 2 °C/min was per-
formed, with the spindle No. 3 at 50 rpm. The pH of the hydrogels was
measured at 4 ± 1 °C, under constant stirring, using a pH meter
(Corning 430 New York, USA).
In addition to viscosity measurements as a function of temperature,
the sol-gel transition temperature, as well as the time needed to gel,
were
determined
for
hydrogels
by
the
following
methods:
(i)
Determination of the non-ﬂow time: The time was recorded when the
hydrogels, which were in an incubator at 33 °C, did not ﬂow, once the
vial containing them was reversed. (ii) Loss of movement of a magnetic
bar: Magnetic stir bars were introduced into ﬂasks containing the hy-
drogels. The temperature gradually increased, recording the moment
when the bars stopped completely. (iii) Brownian motion loss tempera-
ture: This was determined by taking advantage of the measurement
principle of the dynamic light scattering technique using a Zetasizer
Nano ZS90 (Malvern, Worcs, UK). PS measurements were made on a
ramp from 5 to 30 °C, recording the temperature where the value of PS
drops drastically, indicating that the system has gelled and therefore,
the equipment was not able to measure PS. (iv) Micellization tempera-
ture: Thermograms were performed by diﬀerential scanning calorimetry
(DSC) using a Q20 calorimeter (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA).
The analysis was made for the polymer (Pluronic® F-127) and for the
diﬀerent hydrogels, placing approximately 10 mg in Tzero® aluminum
pans (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA). The analysis was carried
out under the following conditions: sample equilibrium at 0 °C, iso-
therm for 1 min and a heating ramp of 1 °C/min until 70 °C.
Stability
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
3

The stability of the hydrogels, maintained at 4 ± 0.5 °C, was followed
for 3 months, observing any physical change and measuring the visc-
osity at time 0, 7, 15, 30, 60 and 90 days. Additionally, the stability of
the PL included in the hydrogels was determined by circular dichroism.
Occlusive eﬀect
Pig skin was assembled in modiﬁed Franz cells, ﬁlling the receiving
chamber with a buﬀer solution pH 7.2 and extending 100 μl of each
hydrogel (containing aprox. 75 µg of NP) on the exposed surface of the
skin. The cells were maintained at 33 °C ± 0.5 °C inside an incubator.
After 24 h of contact, and with the complete evaporation of the HG
water, the water loss was measured using a Tewameter® TM-300
(Courage & Khazaka Electronic, Köln, Germany). The results were
compared with those obtained with untreated skin.
In vitro release of PL from the hydrogel
A volume of 5 ml of hydrogel containing PL (PL HG) or hydrogel con-
taining PL-loaded nanoparticles (NP+PL HG), was placed in the bottom
of a ﬂask and incubated at 33 °C ± 0.5 °C until reaching a non-ﬂuid
semi-solid state. Then, 2 ml of PBS solution pH 7.2 was carefully added
over the hydrogel. The entire volume of PBS was replaced with fresh
medium at diﬀerent time intervals, analyzing its PL content by UV
spectroscopy at 280 nm (validation parameters shown in the supple-
mentary material). The test was performed in triplicate.
In vivo evaluation of the NP+PL HG system
The Ethics Committee of Escuela Nacional de Medicina y Homeopatía-
IPN (Mexico), approved animal experimentation (CBE/015/2018),
which was carried out in accordance with the Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals of the oﬃcial Mexican standard NOM-062-
ZOO-1999. A group of seven CD1 mice, from 7 to 9 weeks of age was
used. The mice were anesthetized with a ketamine (90 mg/kg)-xylazine
(7 mg/kg) cocktail and later, the hair on the back of each mouse was
shaved and the surgery was performed. Four punch biopsies were
performed to create full-thickness cutaneous wound with 3 mm size in
diameter. Then, 5 μL of NP HG, NP+PL HG or PL solution, were de-
posited on three of the wounds, using the fourth wound as control
(without treatment). The wounds were treated by the daily application
of the aforementioned formulations, following the evolution of the
wounds by means of photographs on days 0, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10. After
that, the wound area was determined using imajeJ® software (version
1.52q, National Institutes of Health, USA), presenting the results gra-
phically.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preparation and characterization of nanoparticles
Table 1 shows the particle size (PS), polydispersity index (PDI) and
Z potential (zP) values for the PL-loaded nanoparticles (NP+PL) and
for placebo nanoparticles (NP). Unlike lipid systems, PLGA produces
nanoparticles with more homogeneous sizes, without the need to carry
out a subsequent reduction (Sahin et al., 2017; Mura et al., 2011;
Elizondo et al., 2011). Signiﬁcantly larger size values were obtained
with the inclusion of PL, which was expected, considering that it is a
mixture of protein, although in both cases, with and without PL, the
nanoparticles showed a low dispersion, as shown by the PDI values
obtained. In relation to the zP, a value of approximately -29 ± 1 was
obtained for placebo nanoparticles, which may be indicative of a very
stable system [Mura et al., 2011]. However, the incorporation of PL in
NPs signiﬁcantly reduced zP by almost 40%, attributable to the inter-
action of the polar groups of PL with the carboxyl groups of PLGA. The
negative zP values are also attributed to the carboxyl terminal group of
PLGA, which is ionized in the aqueous medium [Danhier et al., 2012;
Tefas et al., 2015].
Table 2 shows the values of encapsulation eﬃciency (%EE) and
loading capacity (LC) when incorporating two diﬀerent amounts of PL.
As observed, although the %EE decreased when increasing the amount
of PL, the LC increased by more than 60%. The reduction in %EE by
increasing the amount of PL from 2 mg (drug:polymer ratio 1:75) to
8 mg (drug:polymer ratio 1:19) can be attributed to the saturation of
the system, as reported for various nanometric carriers (Goke and
Bunjes, 2018; Sun et al., 2012).
One of the advantages of therapeutic proteins is that very small
concentrations
have
signiﬁcant
pharmacological
eﬀects
(Mitragotri et al., 2014). In the case of PL, previous studies have shown
that approximately 100 ng of PL/15000 ﬁbroblasts are required to have
an eﬀect on the proliferation and migration of ﬁbroblasts in cell culture
(unpublished data). Therefore, considering the loading capacity ob-
tained in this work, the amount of PL is well above the dose required to
obtain the proliferative eﬀect necessary for the healing of a wound. It
should be noted, that although a low %EE may be expected for the PL,
due to the diﬀerent nature of PLGA (hydrophobic) and PL (hydrophilic),
an adequate %EE was achieved thanks to the preparation technique
used in this work, which has proven to be useful to increase the %EE of
hydrophilic molecules, such as proteins (Soppimath et al., 2001;
Makadia and Siegel, 2011; Nabi-Meibodi et al., 2013; Patel et al.,
2014). Considering the above, the 1:19 PL:PLGA ratio was used for the
subsequent tests.
The nanoparticles presented a spherical shape, as shown in SEM
images (Fig. 1). An increase in particle size was observed when in-
corporating PL (NP+PL), which corroborates the result obtained by
dynamic light scattering (Table 1). The small diﬀerences between dy-
namic light scattering and microscopy can be attributed to the process
of preparation of the sample prior to observation and also to the eﬀect
of the electronic source on nanoparticles (Bibi et al., 2011).
A way to assess that PL has been incorporated into NP and thus
justify the ability of NP to protect PL from the external factors that it
will face within a wound (e.g., pH, temperature, proteases), is the
evaluation of its thermal behavior. Fig. 2 shows the thermal events for
PL, PLGA, the physical mixture of both components, the placebo na-
noparticles (NP) and the nanoparticles with PL (NP+PL). In the case of
the physical mixture, two signals were observed, one at 44.6 °C, cor-
responding to PLGA, and the other at 125.3 °C which was associated to
the lyophilized PL. Considering that only these two components form
the mixture, a shift from 127.8 ºC to 125.3 ºC in the endotherm asso-
ciated with the PL, might indicate that there was an interaction be-
tween these two components during the mixing procedure. The value of
Tg in the NP corresponded to that reported for PLGA 50:50 (Zolnik and
Burgess, 2007). The thermogram labeled NP+PL did not show the
characteristic signal for PL, which indicated that it was incorporated in
NP. The same result has been reported when incorporating a protein in
Table 1
Values of particle size (PS), polydispersity index (PDI) and Z potential (zP) for
plain nanoparticles (NP) and loaded nanoparticles (NP+PL)a.
NP
NP+PL
PS (nm)
267.0 ± 10.5
317.9 ± 18.2*
PDI
0.103 ± 0.026
0.298 ± 0.023*
zP (mV)
−29.1 ± 1.0
−17.6 ± 1.8*
a PL:PLGA ratio 1:19.
⁎ p < 0.05 after addition of PL (n = 6).
Table 2
Values of encapsulation eﬃciency (%EE) and loading capacity (LC) for the
nanoparticle suspensions prepared with two diﬀerent amounts of platelet lysate
(PL).
PL added (mg)
PL:PLGA ratio
%EE
LC (µg/mg)
2
1:75
90.3 ± 4.4
12.0 ± 3.1
8
1:19
60.1 ± 3.7*
32.0 ± 2.9*
⁎ p < 0.05 after increasing the amount of PL (n = 6).
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
4

PLGA nanoparticles (Azizi et al., 2013). The shift of approximately 3 °C
in the Tg of NP+PL with respect to the PLGA value, may be related to
an interaction between PL and the polymer (just as observed in the case
of the physical mixture). Considering the nature of PLGA, it can be
thought that the interactions are hydrophobic with some contributions
of hydrogen bonds (Yadav and Sawant, 2010; Miladia et al., 2015).
Fig. 3 presents the infrared spectra of the raw materials used for the
preparation of nanoparticles, as well as the spectra for NP and NP+PL.
The arrows in the spectrum for PL are attributed to amide I and amide II
characteristic signals, although these bands were not observed in the
system marked as NP+PL. This behavior correlates very well with that
observed in the calorimetric studies which indicate the incorporation of
PL in NP (Fig. 2). Another aspect that suggests the encapsulation of PL
in NP is the presence of a band around 3286 cm−1 in the system labeled
as NP+PL, commonly called amide A, attributed to the -NH group of PL
(Barth, 2007; Kong and Yu, 2007), which is not observed naturally in
the polymer. It should also be noted that one of the main signals of
PLGA at 1750 cm−1 corresponding to the carbonyl group (C = O) is
clearly observed in both NP and NP+PL.
The results of the stability studies performed for NP and NP+PL, are
shown in Table 3. Although no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found in PS,
PDI and zP, neither for NP nor for NP+PL during the three months in
Fig. 1. SEM micrographies for NP (left) and NP+PL (right). The square shows a representative nanoparticle of each group with its particle size value in nm.
Fig. 2. Thermograms obtained with the raw materials, the physical mixture, NP and NP+PL.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
5

which the stability of the nanosystems was evaluated (p>0.05); on
average 1.9 mg of PL were released (approximately 33% in relation to
the initial amount). The release of PL from NP is attributed to the
natural diﬀusion of PL, due to the diﬀerence in hydrophilicity between
the PLGA and PL (Soppimath et al., 2001). It is worth mentioning that
the PL released each time preserved its activity when added to a ﬁ-
broblast culture (data not shown).
Fig. 3. Infrared spectra for raw materials, NP and NP+PL.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
6

3.2. Eﬀect of temperature and wound ﬂuid on the particle size
Changes in the size of PL in solution, NP and NP+PL, were mon-
itored as the temperature increased, without ﬁnding signiﬁcant changes
until before 40 °C (Fig. 4). It was only after 40 °C that there was an
increase in the size of the PL in solution (e.g., from 34 to 47 nm at
44 °C), attributed to protein unfolding and aggregate formation
(Roberts, 2014). The PS of unloaded nanoparticles (NP) was not mod-
iﬁed as the temperature increased, while the system containing PL (NP
+PL) decreased its size as the temperature increased above 40 °C (e.g.,
approximately from 382 to 323 nm at 44 °C, reaching 276 nm at 55 °C).
This decrease can be attributed to the fact that the protein adsorbed on
the surface of the nanoparticles, began to desorb going to solution,
causing the PS to decrease. However, these changes would not be ex-
pected to occur at normal body temperature. Another relevant wound
characteristic that has to be taken into account, and that can aﬀect
nanoparticles upon their administration, is the presence of a ﬂuid
known as wound ﬂuid (WF), resulting from the drainage of blood
plasma to the wound site (Staiano-Coico et al., 2000). The results
showed that the size of unexposed NP remained constant (approxi-
mately 250 nm), while systems exposed to blood plasma (simulating the
WF) increased their PS, reaching an average size of 400 nm (Fig. 5).
This phenomenon can be attributed to the adsorption properties of NPs,
which are capable of interacting with blood proteins, resulting in pro-
tein-nanoparticle corona formation (Fornaguera et al., 2015). The vo-
lume of blood plasma used for the study was chosen taking into account
the average amount produced per day in a wound of certain dimensions
(Thomas, 1997), considering of course that the great variability be-
tween individuals with chronic wounds and the pathophysiology of the
wound, can cause the amount of WF to be very variable (Cutting, 2003).
3.3. Eﬀect of free and encapsulated PL on a ﬁbroblast culture
In order to assess that PL maintained its biological activity once
incorporated in nanoparticles, and also to corroborate that the condi-
tions of the manufacturing process of nanoparticles did not aﬀect its
performance, the eﬀect of the systems on a ﬁbroblasts cell culture was
evaluated. As appreciated in Fig. 6, after 24 h of contact with the PL
solution and NP+PL, the cell-free space generated in the ﬁbroblast cell
culture was almost covered, compared to the control (a phosphate
buﬀer solution) and to the NP (unloaded nanoparticles). A slight dif-
ference in the appearance of the cell culture was observed for PL and NP
+PL regarding the saturation of the zone. This can be attributed to the
controlled release of PL when included in NP. Something relevant about
this test is that PL retained its biological activity when incorporated
into a nanometric system.
3.4. Hydrogel-type platform characterization
With the experimental evidence shown so far in this document,
nanosystems suﬀered from drug leakage when they are in suspension
(Table 3) (Hernandez-Caselles et al., 1990). Likewise, due to the low
viscosity of the NP suspension, its application and residence on the
target site becomes diﬃcult, so it is expected that the incorporation of
NP into a hydrogel-type platform (HG) can solve these two problems. In
addition, the property of Pluronic® F127, as a thermosensitive polymer,
allows the platform to be in a ﬂuid form at room temperature (ap-
proximately 22 °C), in order to be administered in the form of a spray,
and subsequently due to the temperature of the wound (approximately
33.5 °C) it will solidify, allowing the formulation to be retained in the
wound area. Another additional advantage of this type of administra-
tion is the possibility of avoiding contact with other parts of the body,
which minimizes the possibility of contaminating the wound at the time
of applying the formulation.
Table 3
Stability studies for NP and NP+PL at 4.0 °C ± 0.1 (n = 3).
0 days
7 days
15 days
1 month
2 months
3 months
PS (nm)
NP
264.7 ± 12.2
261.0 ± 12.8
266.3 ± 26.2
262.7 ± 18.3
252.3 ± 10.2
256.7 ± 13.4
NP+PL
333.1 ± 25.8
335.5 ± 13.9
307.0 ± 26.9
317.4 ± 23.0
343.7 ± 9.8
328.1 ± 20.2
PDI
NP
0.101 ± 0.024
0.116 ± 0.059
0.097 ± 0.044
0.091 ± 0.053
0.065 ± 0.128
0.088 ± 0.098
NP+PL
0.307 ± 0.024
0.285 ± 0.015
0.314 ± 0.014
0.316 ± 0.014
0.291 ± 0.010
0.284 ± 0.016
ZP (mV)
NP
−30.0 ± 1.52
−28.2 ± 1.27
−28.6 ± 2.07
−27.0 ± 2.51
−26.7 ± 1.03
−26.4 ± 2.09
NP+PL
−17.4 ± 0.66
−18.3 ± 1.12
−19.5 ± 1.50
−16.5 ± 1.87
−16.1 ± 0.50
−16.4 ± 0.70
PL (mg)
NP
—
—
—
—
—
—
NP+PL
5.68 ± 0.18
4.82 ± 0.56
4.01 ± 0.34
4.30 ± 0.11
4.0 ± 0.14
3.81 ± 0.21
PS = Particle size; PDI = polydispersity index; zP = Z potential; PL = Platelet lysate amount; NP = Placebo nanoparticles; NP+PL = PL-loaded nanoparticles.

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Particle size (nm)
Temperature (°C)
NP
NP+PL
PL
Fig. 4. Eﬀect of temperature on the size of PL in solution, NP and NP+PL.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
7

The gelation temperature of the hydrogels and the moment in which
this occurs was determined in this work by diﬀerent techniques, in-
cluding the measurement of viscosity as the temperature increased.
Fig. 7A shows the viscosity values of hydrogels with respect to the
temperature for HG (without nanoparticles), HG containing unloaded
nanoparticles (NP HG) and HG containing PL-loaded nanoparticles (NP
+PL HG). As can be seen for the three proﬁles, the viscosity increased
as the temperature rose, having its highest viscosity value above 32 °C,
so it is expected that at the moment of its administration, the hydrogel
will gel completely, allowing its permanence on the application site
during the PL release period. Although the viscosity began to decrease
after 36 to 37 °C, this decrease was not relevant, without causing the
HG to spill out of the wound site. The decrease in viscosity at tem-
peratures above 36 °C can be attributed to a relaxation of the polymer
chains by thermal agitation, which increase their mobility and therefore
the ﬂuidity. The time needed to gel was determined visually, placing
the hydrogel in vials, which were kept in an incubator at 33 °C. The
moment when the hydrogel did not ﬂow, remaining at the bottom of the
vials when they were inverted, was recorded (Fig. 7B). The base gel
(HG) began to gel earlier (at 5 min) than the systems with the nano-
particles (NP HG and NP + PL HG), but all the systems completely lost
their ﬂuidity at 10 min. In this study, a volume of 500 μl of hydrogel
was used in all cases, so if it took between 5 and 10 min for this volume
to form a gel, it would be expected that for the thin layers that will be
deposited on a wound, the non- ﬂow time will be much less.
Other techniques were used in order to identify the point where
hydrogels undergo a change from a state of "free" polymer chains to a
micellar state, thereby causing hydrogels to have a more rigid structure
(Nie et al., 2011; Matanovic et al., 2014). Among these techniques,
calorimetry allowed to follow the micellization process, which for the
base hydrogel (HG) occurred at approximately 32 °C, whereas for the
systems with nanoparticles (NP HG and NP + PL HG), this point was
found below 25 °C (data shown in the supplementary material). It has
been reported that the presence of a structure such as nanoparticles

100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Particle size (nm)
Time (h)
NP unexposed to WF
NP exposed to WF
Fig. 5. Eﬀect of exposure time of wound ﬂuid (WF) on the particle size of NP. Blood plasma was used as a WF simulator. A temperature of 33 °C was maintained
during the measurement.
Fig. 6. In vitro evaluation of the eﬀect of PL in solution, NP and NP + PL on a scratched ﬁbroblasts cell culture. The upper images correspond to the scratched
ﬁbroblasts before applying the formulations, and the ones below are the resulting images after 24 h in contact with the formulations. Control was a PBS solution.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
8

within a hydrogel modiﬁes its micellization point to a value lower than
that of the base system (without nanoparticles) (Matanovic et al.,
2014). Other methods used in this work included the point at which a
magnetic bar stopped completely due to the increase in viscosity,
meaning that the hydrogel no longer ﬂowed. In this way, the sol-gel
transition temperature value was around 28 ºC for all the systems. The
same phenomenon occurs when carrying out the Brownian motion loss
study, in which the size of the systems was monitored by dynamic light
scattering at increasing temperatures. In this case, above 27 °C there
was a fall to sizes very close to zero, indicative of the loss of movement
and therefore to the loss of ﬂuidity. This phenomenon is explained by
the fact that by dynamic light scattering the size is proportional to the
Brownian motion rate, so if the latter is lost, the same thing happens
with the size value. The results of micellization monitored by calori-
metry, as well as those of Brownian motion loss temperature, can be
consulted in the supplementary material.
The pH of the intact skin is between 4.0 and 6.0. This acidic pH is
attributed mainly to the presence of an "acid mantle" that has an im-
portant contribution on the skin's barrier properties (Schneider et al.,
2007). In the case of wounds, the role of pH (whose value is between
7.15 and 8.9) has proven to be of fundamental importance during the
rehabilitation of chronic wounds (Percival et al., 2014; Schneider et al.,
2007). Prolonged chemical acidiﬁcation of the wound bed, results in an
increase of the rate of healing of venous ulcers in the lower extremities.
Fig. 7. (A) Viscosity proﬁles for hydrogels versus temperature changes. (B) Non-ﬂow time of the diﬀerent HG at 33.5 °C. A blue dye was added in order to more
clearly visualize the hydrogel. Base = without nanosystem (HG); HG containing unloaded nanoparticles (NP HG); HG containing PL-loaded NP (NP+PL HG).
P=Poise.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
9

The main explanation for this mechanism is related to the increase in
the availability of oxygen, and to the reduction of the histotoxicity of
ﬁnal products of bacteria, among others. It has also been mentioned
that the wound ﬂuid (WF) contains a high level of proteases whose
activity is extremely sensitive to pH. The peak of activity of proteases is
between 7 and 8 and decreases rapidly in the presence of acidic en-
vironments, being enhanced at pH above 7 (Greener et al., 2005). In
addition, when a wound is maintained in acidic conditions, ﬁbroblasts
proliferate more actively (Liu et al., 2002).
The hydrogels had a pH value between 6.5 and 6.6, which suggests
that the activity of proteases may decrease, allowing the release of PL
from the nanoparticulate system, and therefore, performing their
therapeutic activity with a low probability of being degraded by these
enzymes (at least, a slower degradation rate is expected), as demon-
strated by Greener et al. (2005) who noticed that the fall in pH around
6.0 decreases the activity of proteases by 40–90%.
3.5. Stability
The stability of the hydrogels was followed for three months,
measuring their viscosity and observing the physical changes that could
occur. No changes in the viscosity of the systems are reported during
this time, nor any noticeable alteration to the naked eye. In addition,
the stability of the PL included in the hydrogels was veriﬁed by circular
dichroism. Fig. 8A shows the spectra of HG with and without PL
compared with a solution of PL, presenting almost the same spectra
proﬁle for PL HG and for PL solution. In addition, with the aim of
corroborating that the proteins of PL maintain their folded structure
when exposed to the temperature of the wound, protein denaturation
was evaluated by circular dichroism at 222 nm. Fig. 8B shows the de-
naturing curve of PL in solution compared with the hydrogel containing
PL (PL HG). As can be observed, when included in HG, PL began its
transition from native to denatured, approximately 8 °C later (black
dotted arrow) compared to the PL solution (black solid arrow). It can
even be observed that 50% of denaturation, with respect to the initial
concentration, occurred at about 70 °C for the PL HG (black solid line),
which was higher than for the PL solution (57 °C, black dotted line).
This agrees with the reports conﬁrming the protection that hydrogels
provide to the drugs, among them platelet rich plasma [Selvan et al.,
2020; Samberg et al., 2019; Jain et al., 2017].
3.6. Occlusive eﬀect
When applying a formulation or a dressing on a wound, it is de-
sirable that it generates a semi-occlusive environment, since one of the
"natural" forms of recovery of a wound is the autocatalytic activity that
degrades dead tissue (Zhai and Maibach, 2007), and this occurs with a
certain level of humidity in the damaged area. Below a certain level of
humidity, the rate of wound healing slows down and on the other hand,
a totally occlusive system favors bacterial growth and even encourage
greater proteolytic activity that would degrade endogenous growth
factors (Dreifke et al., 2015; McCarty and Percival, 2013). In this work,
the degree of occlusion caused by hydrogels on pig skin in vitro was
determined by measuring the transepidermal water loss (TEWL). Fig. 9
shows the reduction in TEWL with the diﬀerent hydrogels, in relation to
untreated skin (skin without hydrogel). As can be seen, the presence of
Fig. 8. (A) Circular dichroism spectra for a PBS solution, platelet lisate in PBS solution (PL solution), hydrogel (Base HG), and hydrogel containing PL (PL HG); (B)
Denaturing proﬁles for the PL solution and PL HG.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
10

the base gel (HG) generated a reduction in TEWL of around 20%, while
for the gel with placebo nanoparticles (NP HG) and nanoparticles with
PL (NP+PL HG), a reduction of around 65% and 45% were obtained,
respectively, these reductions were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from HG
(p<0.05). This behavior is explained by the fact that the presence of
nanoparticles (about 75 mg of NP per 100 ml of HG), is expected to
limit the moisture loss to a greater extent than when the base hydrogel
(HG) is applied. On the other hand, the hydrophilic nature of PL in NP
+PL HG, caused a greater attraction of water towards the NP, resulting
in a lower percentage of reduction (on average 45% with respect to the
initial value). Therefore, considering that the value of TEWL showed a
decrease between 45 and 65% in the case of hydrogels with nano-
particles, it can be thought that the systems exert a semi-occlusive eﬀect
on the skin, because they only partially block the loss of transepidermal
water. This could represent another advantage in addition to those al-
ready mentioned for the system proposed in this work.
3.7. In vitro delivery of PL from the systems
In Fig. 10, the release proﬁles of all the systems prepared in this
work, including the PL in solution, used as reference can be compared.
As expected, the release of PL from the solution was immediate,
reaching 23% at 30 min and having practically released 100% at 3 h.
When the PL was formulated in the hydrogel (PL HG) it diﬀused stea-
dily over time, without a lag time. The release reaches 98% at 12 h.
From the nanoparticles (NP + PL), the release presented a lag time,
quantifying the PL in the receptor medium at 3 h. As with the hydrogel,
the release proﬁle of the PL from the nanoparticles was constant and
was completed at 13 h with an average of 94% released. Therefore, with
both systems a sustained release was achieved for 12 h. When evalu-
ating the release of the complete system (NP+PL HG) there was a lag
time greater than with the NP+PL system, quantifying PL in the re-
ceptor solution after 5 h. The release was constant until 13 h with ap-
proximately 75% released, decreasing the release rate from this time,
but continuing until 24 h when 96% was reached. This decrease in the
release rate can be attributed to the depletion of the drug in the system,
which reduces the ﬂow. In the latter case, the PL has to cross two
barriers to reach the target site: the polymeric layer of NP and subse-
quently the platform structure of HG, which allows prolonging the re-
lease for 24 h. The results obtained coincide with reports that show a
sustained and controlled release when formulating growth factors in
nanoparticles (Gainza et al., 2015; Chu et al., 2010), in hydrogels
(Gainza et al., 2015; Jain et al., 2017; Dumortier et al., 2006) or with
the combination of carriers and hydrogels (Ribeiro et al., 2013).
3.8. In vivo evaluation of the NP+PL HG system
The eﬀect of PL on wound closure, both in its free form (in solution)
and included in the system (NP+PL HG), was evaluated by a cutaneous
excisional wound-healing model. In order to contrast the eﬀect, a
control (wound without treatment) and a placebo formulation (NP HG)
were also monitored. Images of representative wounds of the mice from
days 0, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 are presented in Fig. 11A and B. As shown, on
day 3, only slight diﬀerences were found among the wounds. However,
on day 5, wounds treated with PL (PL solution) and NP+PL HG, as well
as the placebo formulation (NP HG), showed a rather slight progress in
wound closure. This can be attributed to the proliferative and migration
eﬀects of PL, but also to the protective and moisturizing eﬀect provided
by the NP HG system as such. Some authors attribute the progress in
wound regeneration to lactate produced by the degradation of PLGA,
which accelerates angiogenesis and activates pro-collagen factors
(Gainza et al., 2015); however, in our case is risky to ensure this, due to
the short contact time. The changes in the area of the wound were
recorded in the graph that appears in Fig. 11C, where it can be seen that
on day 5 there are already signiﬁcant diﬀerences (p < 0.05) between
the NP+PL HG system and the other systems, the wound disappearing
with this treatment from day 7. These in vivo data suggest that PL ap-
plication using nanoparticles to prevent its degradation, and in-
corporated into a hydrogel to improve its application and retention, and
forming a semi-occlusive protective ﬁlm, accelerates wound closure,
having shown to be more eﬀective than PL in solution (Dreifke et al.,
2015). It is important to notice that the PL solution also improved
wound healing, nonetheless, the appreciation of the wounded place was
still visible at day 10. This can be attributed to the fact that PL in so-
lution will be more susceptible to degradation by proteases and pH in a
chronic wound (McCarty and Percival, 2013), while the complete
system allowed a closer contact, for a longer time with the aﬀected site,
releasing PL in a sustained manner. No clinically signiﬁcant weight loss
or evidence of infection in any mouse were appreciated throughout the
study period.
Fig. 9. Decrease in transepidermal water loss (TEWL) for pigskin exposed to HG
systems. Hydrogel without nanosystem (HG); HG containing unloaded nano-
particles (NP HG); HG containing PL-loaded NP (NP+PL HG). Error bars re-
present conﬁdence intervals with α=0.05 (n = 8). *p<0.05.
Fig. 10. Release proﬁles of PL from diﬀerent systems: (●) NP+PL HG: hydrogel
containing PL-loaded nanoparticles; (■) PL HG: hydrogel containing PL; (▲)
NP+PL: PL-loaded nanoparticles; (×) PL in solution. The graph was con-
structed with the averages of three replicates (n = 3). Error bars represent the
standard deviation.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
11

The results found in this work coincide with that reported by other
authors in relation to an increase in cell proliferation and a faster
wound recovery by including biomolecules participating in the tissue
regeneration process, in some type of carrier (e.g., micro - nanoparticle
or hydrogel) as reported by Chu et al. (2010), who demonstrate that
encapsulation of rhEGF in PLGA nanoparticles stimulates cell pro-
liferation and reduces healing time. Fontana et al. (2016), who loaded
platelet lysate into porous silicon microparticles ﬁnding a greater
proliferative eﬀect and an eﬀective, but short lasting acidophilia of the
collagen ﬁbres, a sign of regeneration. Other authors found that the
inclusion of platelet-rich plasma in a gel promoted the proliferation of
ﬁbroblasts [Selvan et al., 2020; Samberg et al., 2019; Jain et al., 2017].
As discussed so far in this document, the prepared system constitutes a
potentially valuable alternative for the treatment of wounds.
Fig. 11. (A) and (B) are representative images of the evolution of the four full-thickness wounds caused to mice, as a function of time, for each treatment. The
arrowheads indicate the original wound places for PL solution and for NP+PL HG. (C) Graph showing the excisional wound-closure area in the dorsal region of mice
during diﬀerent treatment days. Platelet lisate in PBS solution (PL solution); HG containing unloaded nanoparticles (NP HG); HG containing PL-loaded NP (NP+PL
HG). Control: wound without treatment. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
12

4. Conclusion
A smart thermo-reversible system was prepared, containing PLGA
nanoparticles loaded with a platelet lysate, intended for the treatment
of chronic wounds. Polymeric nanoparticles were characterized by
particle size, Z potential, polydispersity index and encapsulation eﬃ-
ciency, showing adequate technological characteristics for the purpose
of the study and guaranteeing the dose necessary to achieve a ther-
apeutic eﬀect. The inclusion of the lysate in the particles was corro-
borated by means of techniques such as infrared spectroscopy and
diﬀerential scanning calorimetry. It was found that the lysate included
in the particles enhances the repair eﬀect on a culture of ﬁbroblasts,
promoting cell migration and proliferation.
The inclusion of the nanoparticles in the thermo-reversible gel oﬀers
multiple advantages such as the following: (i) Easy administration, as it
can be applied in the form of a spray, which on contact with the site
forms a protective ﬁlm on the wound. (ii) The release is prolonged for
up to 24 h, which guarantees the gradual release of the lysate during
this time. (iii) It provides a semi-occlusive eﬀect, forming a protective
barrier that keeps a certain degree of humidity, but which allows an
adequate gaseous exchange.
The results of the in vitro studies with which the properties of this
system were evaluated, are very promising, and are supported by the in
vivo tests performed in mice, where a faster tissue regeneration was
observed when applying the complete system (NP+PL HG).
Funding
This work was supported by the PAPIIT IN226119 project (DGAPA,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) and PIAPI1803 (Facultad
de Estudios Superiores Cuautitlán, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México).
Credit author statement
This was the contribution of each author during the development of
this work:
Sergio A Bernal-Chávez - Development of the bulk of the experi-
mental part: Preparation and characterization of the nanoparticles in-
cluding the platelet lysate. Inclusion of the nanoparticles in the hy-
drogel. Characterization of the hydrogel. In vivo studies. Sergio Alcalá-
Alcalá - Micrographies. Support for the release studies and transepi-
dermal water loss tests. Doris Cerecedo - Obtaining the platelet lysate.
Evaluation of the eﬀect on ﬁbroblasts. Support the protocol for in vivo
studies. Adriana Ganem-Rondero - Proposal, administration of the
project and planning of activities. Analysis of results and revision of the
manuscript.
Declaration of Competing Interest
None
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y
Tecnología (CONACYT) for the scholarship provided to Bernal-Chávez.
The authors also thank Dr. Claudia Guadalupe Benítez Cardoza (Escuela
Nacional de Medicina y Homeopatía-IPN) for her generous support
during
circular
dichroism
analysis
and
Prof.
Crisóforo
Mercado
Márquez (Facultad de Estudios Superiores Cuautitlán) for supporting
the in vivo studies.
References
Chandika, P., Ko, S.C., Jung, W.K., 2015. Marine-derived biological macromolecule-based
biomaterials for wound healing and skin tissue regeneration. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
77, 24–35.
Han, G., Ceilley, R., 2017. Chronic wound healing: a review of current management and
treatments. Adv. Ther. 34, 599–610.
Gainza, G., Villullas, S., Pedraz, J.L., Hernandez, R.M., Igartua, M., 2015. Advances in
drug delivery systems (DDSs) to release growth factors for wound healing and skin
regeneration. Nanomedicine 11, 1551–1573.
Chouhan, D., Dey, N., Bhardwaj, N., Mandal, B.B., 2019. Emerging and innovative ap-
proaches for wound healing and skin regeneration: current status and advances.
Biomaterials 216, 119267.
Barrientos, S., Stojadinovic, O., Golinko, M.S., Brem, H., Tomic-Canic, M., 2008. Growth
factors and cytokines in wound healing. Wound Repair Regen. 16, 585–601.
Percival, S.L., McCarty, S., Hunt, J.A., Woods, E.J., 2014. The eﬀects of pH on wound
healing, bioﬁlms, and antimicrobial eﬃcacy. Wound Repair Regen. 22, 174–186.
Cutting, K.F., 2003. Wound exudate: composition and functions. Br. J. Commun. Nurs. 8
(suppl 4–9).
Garcia-Orue, I., Pedraz, J.L., Hernandez, R.M., Igartua, M., 2017. Nanotechnology-based
delivery systems to release growth factors and other endogenous molecules for
chronic wound healing. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Tec. 42, 2–17.
Shanskii, Y.D., Sergeeva, N.S., Sviridova, I.K., Kirakozov, M.S., Kirsanova, V.A.,
Akhmedova, S.A., Antokhin, A.I., Chissov, V.I., 2013. Human platelet lysate as a
promising growth-stimulating additive for culturing of stem cells and other cell types.
Bull. Exp. Biol. Med. 156, 146–151.
Santo, V.E., Popa, E.G., Mano, J.F., Gomes, M.E., Reis, R.L., 2015. Natural assembly of
platelet lysate-loaded nanocarriers into enriched 3D hydrogels for cartilage re-
generation. Acta Biomater. 19, 56–65.
Dellera, E., Bonferoni, M.C., Sandri, G., Rossi, S., Ferrari, F., Del Fante, C., Perotti, C.,
Grisoli, P., Caramella, C., 2014. Development of chitosan oleate ionic micelles loaded
with silver sulfadiazine to be associated with platelet lysate for application in wound
healing. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 88, 643–650.
Santo, V.E., Gomes, M.E., Mano, J.F., Reis, R.L., 2012. Chitosan-chondroitin sulfate na-
noparticles for controlled delivery of platelet lysates in bone regenerative medicine.
J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 3 (6 Suppl), s47–s59.
Fekete, N., Gadelorge, M., Furst, D., Maurer, C., Dausend, J., Fleury-Cappellesso, S.,
Mailander, V., Lotﬁ, R., Ignatius, A., Sensebe, L., Bourin, P., Schrezenmeier, H.,
Rojewski, M.T., 2012. Platelet lysate from whole blood-derived pooled platelet
concentrates and apheresis-derived platelet concentrates for the isolation and ex-
pansion of human bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells: production process,
content and identiﬁcation of active components. Cytotherapy 14, 540–554.
Fontana, F., Mori, M., Riva, F., Makila, E., Liu, D., Salonen, J., Nicoletti, G., Hirvonen, J.,
Caramella, C., Santos, H.A., 2016. Platelet lysate-modiﬁed porous silicon micro-
particles for enhanced cell proliferation in wound healing applications. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 8, 988–996.
Ranzato, E., Patrone, M., Mazzucco, L., Burlando, B., 2008. Platelet lysate stimulates
wound repair of HaCaT keratinocytes. Br. J. Dermatol. 159, 537–545.
Shekhter, A.B., Rudenko, T.G., Istranov, L.P., Guller, A.E., Borodulin, R.R., Vanin, A.F.,
2015. Dinitrosyl iron complexes with glutathione incorporated into a collagen matrix
as a base for the design of drugs accelerating skin wound healing. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci.
78, 8–18.
V.E.Santo, A.R.C.D., Popa, E.G., Gomes, M.E., Mano, J.F., Reis, R.L., 2012. Enhancement
of osteogenic diﬀerentiation of human adipose derived stem cells by the controlled
release of platelet lysates from hybrid scaﬀolds produced by supercritical ﬂuid
foaming. J. Control Release 162, 19–27.
Fonte, P., Araujo, F., Seabra, V., Reis, S., van de Weert, M., Sarmento, B., 2015. Co-
encapsulation of lyoprotectants improves the stability of protein-loaded PLGA na-
noparticles upon lyophilization. Int. J. Pharm. 496, 850–862.
Trengove, N.J., Langton, S.R., Stacey, M.C., 1996. Biochemical analysis of wound ﬂuid
from nonhealing and healing chronic leg ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 4, 234–239.
Dini, V., Salvo, P., Janowska, A., Di Francesco, F., Barbini, A., Romanelli, M., 2015.
Correlation between wound temperature obtained with an infrared camera and
clinical wound bed score in venous leg ulcers. Wounds 27, 274–278.
Liang, C.C., Park, A.Y., Guan, J.L., 2007. In vitro scratch assay: a convenient and in-
expensive method for analysis of cell migration in vitro. Nat. Protoc. 2, 329–333.
Sahin, A., Esendagli, G., Yerlikaya, F., Caban-Toktas, S., Yoyen-Ermis, D., Horzum, U.,
Aktas, Y., Khan, M., Couvreur, P., Capan, Y., 2017. A small variation in average
particle size of PLGA nanoparticles prepared by nanoprecipitation leads to con-
siderable change in nanoparticles’ characteristics and eﬃcacy of intracellular de-
livery. Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 45, 1657–1664.
Mura, S., Hillaireau, H., Nicolas, J., Le Droumaguet, B., Gueutin, C., Zanna, S., Tsapis, N.,
Fattal, E., 2011. Inﬂuence of surface charge on the potential toxicity of PLGA na-
noparticles towards Calu-3 cells. Int. J. Nanomed. 6, 2591–2605.
Elizondo, E., Moreno, E., Cabrera, I., Cordoba, A., Sala, S., Veciana, J., Ventosa, N., 2011.
Liposomes and other vesicular systems: structural characteristics, methods of pre-
paration, and use in nanomedicine. Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 104, 1–52.
Danhier, F., Ansorena, E., Silva, J.M., Coco, R., Le Breton, A., Preat, V., 2012. PLGA-based
nanoparticles: an overview of biomedical applications. J. Control Release 161,
505–522.
Tefas, L.R., Tomuta, I., Achim, M., Vlase, L., 2015. Development and optimization of
quercetin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles by experimental design. Clujul. Med. 88,
214–223.
Goke, K., Bunjes, H., 2018. Carrier characteristics inﬂuence the kinetics of passive drug
loading into lipid nanoemulsions. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 126, 132–139.
Sun, J., Wang, F., Sui, Y., She, Z., Zhai, W., Wang, C., Deng, Y., 2012. Eﬀect of particle size
on solubility, dissolution rate, and oral bioavailability: evaluation using coenzyme Q
(1)(0) as naked nanocrystals. Int. J. Nanomed. 7, 5733–5744.
Mitragotri, S., Burke, P.A., Langer, R., 2014. Overcoming the challenges in administering
biopharmaceuticals: formulation and delivery strategies. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 13,
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
13

655–672.
Soppimath, K.S., Aminabhavi, T.M., Kulkarni, A.R., Rudzinski, W.E., 2001. Biodegradable
polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery devices. J. Control Release 70, 1–20.
Makadia, H.K., Siegel, S.J., 2011. Poly lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) as biodegradable
controlled drug delivery carrier. Polymers (Basel) 3, 1377–1397.
Nabi-Meibodi, M., Vatanara, A., Najafabadi, A.R., Rouini, M.R., Ramezani, V., Gilani, K.,
Etemadzadeh, S.M., Azadmanesh, K., 2013. The eﬀective encapsulation of a hydro-
phobic lipid-insoluble drug in solid lipid nanoparticles using a modiﬁed double
emulsion solvent evaporation method. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 112, 408–414.
Patel, A., Gaudana, R., Mitra, A.K., 2014. A novel approach for antibody nanocarriers
development through hydrophobic ion-pairing complexation. J. Microencapsul. 31,
542–550.
Bibi, S., Kaur, R., Henriksen-Lacey, M., McNeil, S.E., Wilkhu, J., Lattmann, E.,
Christensen, D., Mohammed, A.R., Perrie, Y., 2011. Microscopy imaging of lipo-
somes: from coverslips to environmental SEM. Int. J. Pharm. 417, 138–150.
Zolnik, B.S., Burgess, D.J., 2007. Eﬀect of acidic pH on PLGA microsphere degradation
and release. J. Control Release 122, 338–344.
Azizi, M., Farahmandghavi, F., Joghataei, M., Mojgan Zandi, M.I., Bakhtiary, M.,
Dorkoosh, F.A., Ghazizadeh, F., 2013. Fabrication of protein-loaded PLGA nano-
particles: eﬀect of selected formulation variables on particle size and release proﬁle.
J. Polym. Res. 20, 110.
Yadav, K.S., Sawant, K.K., 2010. Formulation optimization of etoposide loaded PLGA
nanoparticles by double factorial design and their evaluation. Curr. Drug Deliv. 7,
51–64.
Miladia, K., Sfar, S., Fessi, H., Elaissari, A., 2015. Encapsulation of alendronate sodium by
nanoprecipitation and double emulsion: from preparation to in vitro studies. Ind.
Crops Prod. 72, 24–33.
Barth, A., 2007. Infrared spectroscopy of proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1767,
1073–1101.
Kong, J., Yu, S., 2007. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analysis of protein sec-
ondary structures. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin (Shanghai) 39, 549–559.
Roberts, C.J., 2014. Protein aggregation and its impact on product quality. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 30, 211–217.
Staiano-Coico, L., Higgins, P.J., Schwartz, S.B., Zimm, A.J., Goncalves, J., 2000. Wound
ﬂuids: a reﬂection of the state of healing. Ostomy. Wound Manage. 46, 85S–93S quiz
94S-95S.
Fornaguera, C., Caldero, G., Mitjans, M., Vinardell, M.P., Solans, C., Vauthier, C., 2015.
Interactions of PLGA nanoparticles with blood components: protein adsorption,
coagulation, activation of the complement system and hemolysis studies. Nanoscale
7, 6045–6058.
Thomas, S., 1997. Assessment and management of wound exudate. J. Wound Care 6,
327–330.
Hernandez-Caselles, T., Villalain, J., Gomez-Fernandez, J.C., 1990. Stability of liposomes
on long term storage. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 42, 397–400.
Nie, S., Hsiao, W.L., Pan, W., Yang, Z., 2011. Thermoreversible Pluronic F127-based
hydrogel containing liposomes for the controlled delivery of paclitaxel: in vitro drug
release, cell cytotoxicity, and uptake studies. Int. J. Nanomed. 6, 151–166.
Matanovic, M.R., Kristl, J., Grabnar, P.A., 2014. Thermoresponsive polymers: insights
into decisive hydrogel characteristics, mechanisms of gelation, and promising bio-
medical applications. Int. J. Pharm. 472, 262–275.
Schneider, L.A., Korber, A., Grabbe, S., Dissemond, J., 2007. Inﬂuence of pH on wound-
healing: a new perspective for wound-therapy? Arch. Dermatol. Res. 298, 413–420.
Greener, B., Hughes, A.A., Bannister, N.P., Douglass, J., 2005. Proteases and pH in
chronic wounds. J. Wound Care 14, 59–61.
Liu, Y., Kalen, A., Risto, O., Wahlstrom, O., 2002. Fibroblast proliferation due to exposure
to a platelet concentrate in vitro is pH dependent. Wound Repair Regen. 10, 336–340.
Selvan, N.K., Shanmugarajan, T.S., Uppuluri, V.N.V.A., 2020. Hydrogel based scaﬀolding
polymeric biomaterials: approaches towards skin tissue regeneration. J. Drug Deliver.
Sci. Tec. 55, 101456.
Samberg, M., Stone, R., Natesan, S., Kowalczewski, A., Becerra, S., Wrice, N., Cap, A.,
Christy, R., 2019. Platelet rich plasma hydrogels promote in vitro and in vivo angio-
genic potential of adipose-derived stem cells. Acta Biomater. 87, 76–87.
Jain, E., Sheth, S., Dunn, A., Zustiak, S.P., Sell, S.A., 2017. Sustained release of multi-
component platelet-rich plasma proteins from hydrolytically degradable PEG hy-
drogels. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 105, 3304–3314.
Zhai, H., Maibach, H.I., 2007. Eﬀect of occlusion and semi-occlusion on experimental skin
wound healing: a reevaluation. Wounds 19, 270–276.
Dreifke, M.B., Jayasuriya, A.A., Jayasuriya, A.C., 2015. Current wound healing proce-
dures and potential care. Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 48, 651–662.
McCarty, S.M., Percival, S.L., 2013. Proteases and delayed wound healing. Adv. Wound
Care (New Rochelle) 2, 438–447.
Chu, Y., Yu, D., Wang, P., Xu, J., Li, D., Ding, M., 2010. Nanotechnology promotes the
full-thickness diabetic wound healing eﬀect of recombinant human epidermal growth
factor in diabetic rats. Wound Repair Regen. 18, 499–505.
Dumortier, G., Grossiord, J.L., Agnely, F., Chaumeil, J.C., 2006. A review of poloxamer
407 pharmaceutical and pharmacological characteristics. Pharm. Res. 23,
2709–2728.
Ribeiro, M.P., Morgado, P.I., Miguel, S.P., Coutinho, P., Correia, I.J., 2013. Dextran-based
hydrogel containing chitosan microparticles loaded with growth factors to be used in
wound healing. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 33, 2958–2966.
S.A. Bernal-Chávez, et al.
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 146 (2020) 105231
14