[image]
[image]
 E-ISSN: 2148-2373
EN | TR
About Us
○  Journal History
○  Aims and Scope
○  Abstracting and Indexing
Editorial Board
○  Recruitment of Editors
○  Roles and Responsibilities
○  Editorial Board
○  Scientific Board
Journal Policies
○  Advertising
○  Allegations of Misconduct
○  Appeals and Complaints
○  Archiving and Preservation
○  Article Processing Charges (APC)
○  Artificial Intelligence (AI)
○  Authorship and Contributorship
○  Conflicts of Interest
○  Copyright and Licensing
○  Data Availability and Reproducibility
○  Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility (DEIA)
○  Editorial Oversight
○  Ethical Misconduct
○  Open Access

○  Peer Review Policy
○  Post Publication Discussions
○  Research Ethics
Instructions to Authors
○  Instructions to Authors
○  Instructions for Reviewers
○  Ethical Policy
○  Peer Review Process
Contact Us
Preparation and Evaluation of Inflammation Targeted Nano-
micellar Formulation of Celecoxib
PDF
Cite
Share
Request
VOLUME: 7 ISSUE: 3
Original Article
P: 208 - 214
July 2019
Preparation and Evaluation of
Inflammation Targeted Nano-

micellar Formulation of Celecoxib
Bezmialem Science 2019;7(3):208-214
DOI: 10.14235/bas.galenos.2018.2673
Fatemeh BAHADORİ 1
Ayşe Şeyma BÜYÜK 1,2
Ahmed Serdar KOZANOĞLU 1
Zahra ESKANDARI 3
Handan ANKARALI 4
Şerife Evrim KEPEKÇİ TEKKELİ 5
Hümeyra NUR KALELİ 6
Abdurrahim KOÇYİĞİT 6
Author Information Copyright & Licence Information Galenos
& Bezmialem Science Disclaimer
1. Bezmialem Vakıf University Faculty of
Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, İstanbul, Turkey
2. İstinye University Faculty of Pharmacy,

Department of Clinical Pharmacy, İstanbul,
Turkey
3. Yıldız Technical University Faculty of
Sciences and Arts, Department of
Chemistry, Biochemistry Division, İstanbul,
Turkey
4. İstanbul Medeniyet University Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Biostatistics and
Medical Informatics, İstanbul, Turkey
5. Bezmialem Vakıf University Faculty of
Pharmacy, Department of Analytical
Chemistry, İstanbul, Turkey
6. Bezmialem Vakıf University Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Medicinal
Biochemistry, İstanbul, Turkey
No information available.
No information available
Received Date: 03.07.2018
Accepted Date: 19.09.2018
Publish Date: 25.07.2019
PDF

Cite
Share
Request
ABSTRACT
Conclusion:
Based on the hypothesis that the ratio of blood
parameters is inversely proportional to accumulation at
inflammation site, thus, our nano-formulation is targeted
to the tissues in the systemic blood flow and have a
better selective inhibition.
Results:
Prostaglandin E2 and tumor necrosis factor-α levels
were found to be decreased for longer time period by
application of nano-CLX compared to oral and i.v.
Celebrex. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) and IL-6 levels showed a
dramatic decrease at orally administered Celebrex
groups, showing the accumulation of these pro-
inflammatory factors at inflammation area.

Methods:
CLX was physically entrapped in PLGA micelles using
w/o/w emulsion method, resulted in obtaining mono-
dispersed particles with 112 nm size. 50 mg PLGA was
able to carry 50 mg CLX in 20 mL (2.5 mg/mL) with
encapsulation efficiency of 85%. Rheumatoid arthritis
model was achieved by injection of complete Freund’s
Adjuvant to the hint paw of Wistar rats. Infected groups
received oral Celebrex, intravenous (i.v.) Celebrex and
nano-CLX. Each group was compared with a healthy
control group receiving the drug via the same routes.
The obtained serums and the hint paw sizes were
studied for 6 hours in 3 time periods.
Objective:
Celecoxib (CLX), brand named Celebrex, which belongs
to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs family,
selectively inhibits the cytokine related
cyclooxygenase-2 isoenzyme and thus, possesses less
gastrointestinal side effects, have shown to cause
stroke, myocard infarction and even death in some
cases. In this study we aimed to target inflammation site
using CLX uploaded nano-micelles (nano- CLX) made
of poly (lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) to protect other
tissues from its side effects.
Keywords:
Targeted inflammation therapy, Celecoxib, nano drug
delivery system, PLGA, COX2

Introduction
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multisystem chronic
inflammatory disease which especially affects the
peripheral joints in a symmetric manner and often
causes bone erosions, cartilage destruction and joint
deformities. RA has a worldwide distribution, with a
prevalence of approximately 1%. Major complaint is
pain and it is aggravated with movement (1). Preferably,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are
used, which tend to control the symptoms by blocking
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and the production of the
thromboxanes, prostacyclins and prostaglandins.
Gastrointestinal (GI) intolerance and the cardiovascular
complications are the common side-effects of the
NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors (1).
Celecoxib (Celebrex®) (CLX), a selective COX-2
inhibitor, was approved by the FDA for the treatment of
chronical poly-arthritis and osteoarthritis in 1998 (2).
Certainly, selective COX-2 inhibitors decrease the risk
of the GI side effects. Nevertheless, COX-2 is not only a
pro-inflammatory inducible enzyme, it also has various
physiological functions which means it is constitutively
expressed to a high extent in the human body (3). The
clarified paradigm of constitutive COX-1 and inducible
COX-2 has several exceptions: COX-1 may be
modulated during development, whereas COX-2 is
constrictively expressed in the kidney, brain and
reproductive tissues. Additionally, selective inhibitors of
COX-2 decrease prostacyclin, an atheroprotective

agent, however it does not decrease COX-1 derived
thromboxane A2, a vasoconstrictor and proaggregatory
mediator, which can predispose patients to stroke and
heart attack. Therefore, the use of CLX requires further
improvement (4).
Nano-technology is a science area dedicated to the
construction, design and utilization of functional
structures on the nanometer scale (often 100 nm or
even smaller). Biodegradable nanoparticles are
regularly used to improve the therapeutic value of
different water soluble/insoluble medicinal drugs and
bioactive molecules by improving their retention time,
solubility, bioavailability or by bringing the targeting
property to the small molecules such as CLX. These
nanoparticle-drug formulation lowers the expenses and
risks of toxicity in patients (5). Enhanced Permeability
and Retention (EPR) are the most known phenomena in
targeting disease site using nano-drug delivery systems
(NDDS). This elegant strategy uses the enhanced gap
between the endothelial cells of veins at site of
inflammation or cancer compared to that of healthy
tissues (6). This enhanced gap reaches to around 200
nm, while it has been measured as 10-15 nm in healthy
tissue. Entrapping the small molecules within NDDS
with size less than 200 nm provides accumulation of
drug molecules only at the inflammation site.
In order to transport the drug molecules to the cells and
enzymes, a lot of biodegradable polymers are
synthesized (7,8). Polyesters and co-polyesters of the
alpha, beta and gamma-hydroxy acids are the most

common synthetic biodegradable polymers in the last
20 years. Poly-lactic acid, poly-glicolic acid and Poly
(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA), which are copolymer
molecules, are the best defined polymers based on to
their activities and the designs (9,10). PLGA is accepted
as gold standard and is known for self-assembling in
aqueous media entrapping the hydrophobic drug
molecules at the core part of the formed spherical
micelles. PLGA is converted into the lactic acid and the
glycolic acid by hydrolysis in the body, thus is bio-
compatible and bio-degradable (11).
The aim of this study was prepare and characterize a
novel PLGA- CLX nano micellar formulation in order to
target the inflammation site to provide high efficacy and
low toxicity.
Methods
Materials
Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (#F5881), Poly-(D,L-
lactide-co-glycolide) (#P2192) and CLX (#PZ0008) was
purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Rat tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-α Kit (#YHB20170406928), Rat PG-E2 Kit
(#YHB20170406931), Rat interleukin (IL)-1β Kit
(#YHB20170406929) and Rat IL-6 Kit
(#YHB20170406930) was purchased from Yehua, all
other chemicals were analytical grade, unless
mentioned.

Preparation of the Nano-celecoxib Formulation
Fifty mg PLGA and increasing amounts of CLX (10-60
mg) were dissolved in 5 mL of acetone. Acetone
solutions were then combined and added wisely by
dripping on 20 mL of d.d. water containing 0.005%
tween 80 in a very slow manner while stirring on
magnetic stirrer (12). Stirring was continued overnight
allowing all acetone to be evaporated and the day after
the mixture’s volume was adjusted to 20 mL and particle
size was measured as below. This process is
summarized in Figure 1.
Particle Size Measurements
The sizes of PLGA-CLX and free PLGA particles were
measured directly on Zetasizer Nano ZS (model ZEN
3600; Malvern Instrument, Inc., London, UK) at 25 oC.
Default setting on the Zetasizer Nano ZS was used, i.e.
refractive index, absorption. The dispersant used was
water and measurement angle was 173. Measurements
were repeated 5 times, 3 minutes each and data were
analyzed by number distributions (13). All samples were
measured in triplicate. Presence of aggregates in
micron size indicated the precipitated drug molecules.
The max drug concentration with mono-modelar particle
distribution was chosen as the optimized formulation.
Further studies were carried out using the optimized
formulation. According to our experiences, in case of
presence of traces of amorphous aggregates in the
system, measurements based on the volume and
intensity distributions reveal these aggregates better

than the ones based on number distribution. Therefore,
all above mentioned measurements were conducted to
make sure the obtained toxicity results were caused by
the micelles, not aggregates (12).
In vivo Experiment Process
The approval for animal experiments was obtained from
Bezmialem Vakıf University Experimental Animal Ethics
Committee, numbered 2016-241. Since this study was
aimed to compare the toxicity of commercially available
CLX formulation with the novel nano PLGA-CLX, the
toxic dose of CLX was chosen to use in the animal
study. It has been demonstrated that 5 and 7 mg/kg
CLX is tolerable, thus 10 mg/kg of CLX was chosen to
be evaluated at all samples.
Thirty two 5-week-old female Wistar rats (Bezmialem
Vakıf University Experimental, Animal Research Center,
İstanbul-Turkey) were separated randomly within 8
weight-matched groups consisted of 4 animals at each
group and were given free access to a standard chow
and water. All process followed were in complete
agreement with The ARRIVE guidelines (14). 0.1 mL
Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (F5881) was injected to
the right hint paw of the infected groups to induce RA
model. At 0 point (before Freud’s adjuvant injection), 30
min, 3rd and 6th hours after Freud’s adjuvant injection,
0.5 mL blood was taken from all animals and their right
hint paw size to which the adjuvant was injected was
measured. First group was “Healthy Control Group”
(HC) which received neither adjuvant nor medication.

Second group, receivedthe adjuvant without medication
[RA Control Group rheumatoit artritis control group
(RAC)]. The third group received commercially available
celebrex formulation orally, dissolved in water without
getting infected by the adjuvant (HO) and fourth group
received oral celebrex while treated with adjuvant
rheumatoit artritis model (RAO). In the same manner,
the fifth and sixth groups received CLX intravenously, to
compare the efficacy of commercial product while
receiving intravenously, and the sixth group was treated
with the adjuvant (group 5: healthy rats treated with
intravenous and group 6: rheumatoit artritis model
treated with intravenous). The last two groups received
nano PLGA-CLX formulation intravenously (group 7:
home non-invasive ventilation and group 8: RANIV).
Oral and intravenöz formulations were applied as max.
0.5 and 1 mL, respectively (the dose was equal to
10mg/kg of each animal).
Determination of Cytokines and Prostaglandins in
Blood Circulation
All the blood samples were transferred to empty tubes
and were centrifuged in 4000 rpm for 10 minutes to
obtain the serum samples. Obtained serum samples
were kept at -80 °C till the test day. Cytokine and
prostaglandin levels in blood were measured by
sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), using IL-1b, IL-6, TNF-a, prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) ELISA kits. Colorimetric absorbance was
measured at 450 nm on a Bio-Tek ELISA Synergy-H1
microplate reader.

Release Study
Three mL CLX-PLGA with optimum drug and polymer
ratio was transferred into dialysis membrane tubing
SPECTRA/POR 3 Dialysis Membrane (Molecular weight
cut-off 3,5 Lot No: 9200373) which then placed into 300
mL of dialysis medium (Phosphate-buffered saline
buffer, pH 7.4) at 37 oC, while the media was stirred in a
slow manner (15). One mL samples were withdrawn
from the dialysis media at 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12,
20, 22 and 24 hours of the experiment and CLX
concentration was measured using high performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Measuring CLX concentration using HPLC
An analytical method for measuring CLX at HPLC was
developed in order to measure the amount of drug
incorporated with PLGA micelle, and to follow the
release results. HPLC trials were conducted on a
Shimadzu LC 20 liquid chromatograph equipped with a
LC-20AT pump, SIL AT-HT auto-sampler part, and
ultraviolet detector, which was set at 260 nm and CLX
was passed through the colon with 1 mL/min speed with
acetone-water (70:30) solution system from the C18
type colon with 4.6 cm inner diameter, 5µm particle size
(Shimadzu; Kyoto, Japan), where the colon heat was
stabilized to 25 oC. The CLX retention time was 5 min
under these conditions (16,17).
Drug Loading Capacity

The concentration of CLX used in the preparation of the
nano-formulation process was increased step wisely.
Prepared CLX-PLGA formulation was incubated at room
temperature for two hours after which samples with
certain volumes were taken from the formulation and
diluted with methanol 1/5 (V:V) to obtain free drug.
Triple samples from supernatant were injected to the
HPLC. Encapsulation Efficiency was measured using
Equation (1:1) (18).
Stability Studies
Obtained optimized PLGA-CLX formulation was frozen
at -80 oC overnight following by freeze drying at -80 oC
and 0.03 mbar (lyophilizer, Labconco, Freezone 2.5
plus). The obtained fluffy material was incubated at
either room temperature or at -20 oC for 1 week, 2 and
6 months, after which all were re-hydrated with the
amount of water equal to that of pre-drying. Re-hydrated
formulations were studied for particle size and CLX
content as a factor of stability, using above mentioned
methods (15).
Statistical Analysis
Regarding hint paw size and cytokine and prostaglandin
measurements, each group at same time periods was
compared separately and analyzed using Kruskal Wallis
variance analysis. Different groups were determined
using post hoc Dunn test. The p value <0.05 was
considered as statistically significant. All statistical
analyzes were done by using SPSS package program

(ver.23) (19).
Results
Particle Size of the CLX Loaded PLGA Micelles
Particle sizing results of CLX-PLGA are listed in Table
1. As it is seen in Number, volume and intensity results,
particle size is monomodelar up to 30 mg/mL CLX.
Excess amounts of CLX uploading causes obtaining
bimodelar particles. In case of application of nano-CLX-
PLGA for studying efficacy of this drug, this ratio could
be used as the optimized formulation. However, in this
study, we tried to use the toxic dose which
corresponded to 10 mg/kg animal (each rat is around
250 g). Thus, we used 50 mg CLX in 50 mg
PLGA/20mL which the ratio of aggregate was less than
10% in terms of volume and intensity distribution and
the particle size distribution was exactly 100% in terms
of number distribution. Figure 2 shows the particle
characteristics of the optimized formulation in which the
phenylene diisocyanide is 0.415 and the majority of
particles are less than 200 nm. It is noteworthy that all
particles were smaller than 200 nm, which was
necessary for a particle to be used in EPR effect (6).
Hint Paw Size Measurement Results
Figure 3 shows the increase in the hint paw size of the
healthy and infected animals with adjuvant. The

differences between the paw size of the healthy groups
(encoded with H as HC, HO etc.) and the RA (encoded
by RA) groups increased significantly by time. However,
this increase in difference was less significant in the RA
group treated with nano-CLX-PLGA (p<0.01).
Evaluation of Cytokines and Prostaglandins In-vivo
Figure 4 shows the variations in ratios of some
biological indicators of inflammation before and after
administration of oral and intravenous Celebrex and
intravenous application of nano-CLX-PLGA to both
healthy animals and RA models.
As it could be seen above, average results of TNF-a at
the 6th hour showed meaningful decrease in RANIV
group compared to that of RAO (p<0.05 or p<0.10),
however, orally administered Celebrex was significantly
more successful in decreasing the level of PGE2 within
3 hours (not till 6 hours). Nevertheless, intravenously
administered Celebrex was able to decrease the level of
this prostaglandin in the long-term (6 hours). Similarly,
RANIV group showed significantly decreased levels of
PGE2 in the long-term (6 hours). No significant
difference observed between the group which orally
received CLX and the control group in terms of the level
of biological indicators. According to other results,
differences between HC and RAC groups were similar
to differences between HO and RAO groups. Except
that, RAO group showed significant decrease compared
to HO (p>0.05), in terms of IL-6 and PGE2.

Results of Release Study of CLX-PLGA
The release profile of CLX from nano-PLGA micelles is
shown in Figure 5. Almost 70% of the drug was
released within 6 hours with an accelerated behavior
which was expected from an anti-inflammatory agent.
After 6 hours, the release profile showed a very fast
increase, probably due to disruption in the structure of
the nano-micelle in the dialysis membrane.
Drug Loading Capacity
As it could be seen in particle sizing results, the
optimized formulation was determined as the 50 mg
CLX uploaded to 50 g PLGA. Thus, this formulation was
injected to HPLC to detect the amount of drug inside
polymeric micelles and at the aqueous media. %EE was
calculated as:
Stability Studies
Figure 6 shows the results of stability studies made on
CLX-PLGA at two different incubation conditions. While
incubation at room temperature caused a short period of
stability, incubation at -20 oC resulted in obtaining
perfect stability, revealed with keeping almost all drug
inside of the NDDS.
Discussion

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were
announced in the 1960s and became the most
widespread prescribed class of drugs in the World, with
over 100 million prescriptions issued per year in the
United States alone (20). They were used especially for
the treatment of the inflammation, mostly arthritis, and
pain. NSAIDs inhibit the COX which decreases the
inflammation and the pain through the prostaglandin
inhibition. But, the COX enzyme is also existing in
gastric mucosa where it stimulates the gastro-protective
prostaglandins. The identification of two isoforms,
COX-1 and COX-2, and recognition of direct
relationship between COX-1 inhibition and
gastrointestinal system side effects, resulted in
development of selective COX-2 inhibitors that offered
potential to maintain efficacy while decreasing the GI
adverse effects (21). Consequently, administration of
the NSAIDs unavoidably leads to a lack of
prostaglandins which are essential for the physiological
functions. Therapeutic and side effects of this class of
anti-inflammatory drugs are strongly related to their
biochemical mechanism of action (8). As a result, long
term NSAID users suffer from a high incidence of GI
irritation. The risk of death or hospitalization from a GI
adverse event varies from 1.3% to 1.6% per year in
patients with RA (22). These rare, however potentially
serious GI side effects of NSAIDs have become a major
healthcare problem (23).
There are several nanotechnological administrations.
Among them, the treatment, diagnosis, monitoring and
control of the biological systems have lately been

referred as “nanomedicine” by the National Institute of
Health (Bethesda, MD, USA). We can easily say that
the “targeting” property of nanotechnology- managed
particles is the most attractive subject in this area.
The size of the 50 mg CLX incorporated with 50 mg
PLGA/20 mL nano-formulation is under 200 nm and is
very suitable for targeting site of inflammation and also
for studying the toxic dose of CLX due to the high drug
loading efficacy. The release properties of this nano-
formulation is long enough to carry the drug molecule in
NDDS and is accelerated enough to show the fast effect
in urgent cases however according to the in vivo results,
the commercially available oral formulation of Celebrex
shows much faster results.
Previously, Harirforoosh et al. (24) have prepared nano-
PLGA-CLX to assess its pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics in rats. However, no efficacy studies
were done in this research. Their results were in great
accordance with our results. Since the surfactant used
in their formulation was different, the particle sizes were
not comparable however, the increasing ratio of CLX in
serum showed similarity to our release results.
Interestingly, in the study of Harirforoosh et al. (24)
there was no inflammation site and the NDDS
releasedthe drug within the blood flow similar to that of
conventional drug and in this condition no difference
between PGE2 ratios were observed. This could be an
evidence of the success obtained by our group in
targeting the inflammation site and inhibiting PGE2
more significantly by nano-CLX-PLGA. Similarly, Amrite

et. al (14) showed 40% reduction in PGE2 by local
administration of CLX-PLGA microparticles (diameter=
1140±15 nm), containing 14.93%±0.21% of CLX. In
another study, CLX-PLGA was prepared to study its
antitumor activity against brain tumor cells. In this study,
the drug/ polymer ratio was completely in accordance
with the results obtained by our group, where acetone
was used as solvent, however the particle size was
different due to the applied preparation method. Since
this study was an in vitro study, the targeting property of
CLX-PLGA was not revealed however, the release
study which was similar to ours, showed very similar
profile (25).
The biochemical experiments of the nano-CLX effect
prove that CLX has elongated and sustained efficacy on
inflammation while incorporated with micelles
comparing to the conventional CLX; CLX. Comparing
the paw size of the healthy and inflammated animal
groups showed that CLX which was given by gavage
and also administered intravenously showed almost the
same efficacy. It was showed that PGE2 which is
directly related to COX-2 enzyme inhibition was
decreased longer with intravenous nano-CLX
formulation than Celebrex.
In an overview, our results are cohesive and correlated
with the hypothesis that the counted parameters are
being decreased in blood and therefore increased in the
tissues.
In general, differences occurred in the blood levels of

IL-1 and IL-6 were not significant, probably due to their
“pro” inflammation role. However, comparing IL-1 levels
in the RAO and RANIV revealed that RAO group had a
dramatic decrease within 3 hours. The results obtained
from the IL-6 and IL-1 were correlated to each other.
Conclusion
As a conclusion, according to the results obtained from
this study, it is proved that the suggested nano-CLX-
PLGA formulation is able to target the inflammated
tissues in the systemic blood flow and have a better
selective COX-2 inhibition activity. It is obvious that the
results obtained from RAO, RAIV and RANIV groups
are obtained from a single dosage administration and to
achieve complete response, multiple doses are
necessary.
References
1
Peakman M,Vergani D. Basic and Clinical Immunology. 
Elsevier Health Sciences;2009. 
2
Simon LS, Lanza FL, Lipsky PE, Hubbard RC,
Talwalker S, Schwartz BD et al. Preliminary study of the
safety and efficacy of SC-58635, a novel

cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitor: efficacy and safety in two
placebo-controlled trials in osteoarthritis and rheumatoid
arthritis, and studies of gastrointestinal and platelet
effects. Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:1591-602.
3
Katori M, Majima M. Cyclooxygenase-2: its rich diversity
of roles and possible application of its selective
inhibitors. Inflamm Res 2000;49:367-92
4
de Gaetano G, Donati MB,Cerletti C. Prevention of
thrombosis and vascular inflammation: benefits and
limitations of selective or combined COX-1, COX-2 and
5-LOX inhibitors. Trends Pharmacol Sci
2003;24:245-52.
5
Qiao W, Wang B, Wang Y, Yang L, Zhang Y, Shao P.
Cancer therapy based on nanomaterials and
nanocarrier systems. J Nanomater 2010;2010:7.
6
Maeda H. Macromolecular therapeutics in cancer
treatment: the EPR effect and beyond. J Control
Release 2012;164:138-44.
7
Nair LS, Laurencin CT. Biodegradable polymers as
biomaterials. Prog Polym Sci 2007;32:762-98.
8
Tian H, Tang Z, Zhuang X, Chen X, Jing X.
Biodegradable synthetic polymers: preparation,
functionalization and biomedical application. Prog
Polym Sci 2012;37:237-80.

9
Gupta AP, Kumar V. New emerging trends in synthetic
biodegradable polymers–Polylactide: A critique. Eur
Polym J 2007;43:4053-74.
10
Mohamed F, van der Walle CF. Engineering
biodegradable polyester particles with specific drug
targeting and drug release properties. J Pharm Sci
2008;97:71-87.
11
Muthu MS. Nanoparticles based on PLGA and its co‐
polymer: An overview. AJP 2019;3:266-73.
12
Bahadori F, Kocyigit A, Onyuksel H, Dag A, Topcu G.
Cytotoxic, Apoptotic and Genotoxic Effects of Lipid-
Based and Polymeric Nano Micelles, an In Vitro
Evaluation. Toxics 2017;6:7.
13
Banerjee A,Onyuksel H. Human pancreatic polypeptide
in a phospholipid-based micellar formulation. Pharm
Res 2012;29:1698-711.
14
Amrite AC, Ayalasomayajula SP, Cheruvu NP,
Kompella UB. Single periocular injection of celecoxib-
PLGA microparticles inhibits diabetes-induced
elevations in retinal PGE2, VEGF, and vascular
leakage. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:1149-60.
15
Bahadori F, Topçu G,  Eroğlu MS, Önyüksel H. A new
lipid-based nano formulation of vinorelbine. AAPS

PharmSciTech 2014;15:1138-48.
16
Emami J, Fallah R, Ajami A. A rapid and sensitive
HPLC method for the analysis of celecoxib in human
plasma: application to pharmacokinetic studies. DARU
2008;16:211-17.
17
Baboota S, Faiyaz S, Ahuja A, Ali J, Shafiq S, Ahmad S.
Development and validation of a stability-indicating
HPLC method for analysis of celecoxib (CXB) in bulk
drug and microemulsion formulations. Acta Chromatogr
2007;18:116.
18
Wong HL, Bendayan R, Rauth AM, Wu XY.
Development of solid lipid nanoparticles containing
ionically complexed chemotherapeutic drugs and
chemosensitizers. J Pharm Sci 2004;93:1993-2008.
19
Cakal B, Akoz AG, Ustundag Y, Yalinkilic M, Ulker A,
Ankarali H. Red cell distribution width for assessment of
activity of inflammatory bowel disease. Dig Dis Sci
2009;54:842-47.
20
Bello AE, Holt RJ. Cardiovascular risk with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs: clinical implications. Drug Saf
2014;37:897-902.
21
Whittle B. COX-1 and COX-2 products in the gut:
therapeutic impact of COX-2 inhibitors. Gut
2000;47:320-25.

22
Fries JF. NSAID gastropathy: the second most deadly
rheumatic disease? Epidemiology and risk appraisal. J
Rheumatology Suppl 1991;28:6-10.
23
Silverstein FE, Graham DY, Senior JR, Davies HW,
Struthers BJ, Bittman RM, et al. Misoprostol reduces
serious gastrointestinal complications in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis receiving nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs. A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1995;123:241-49.
24
Harirforoosh S, West K, Murrell D, Denham J, Panus P,
Hanley G. Assessment of celecoxib poly (lactic-co-
glycolic) acid nanoformulation on drug
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics in rats. Eur
Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2016;20:4818-29.
25
Kim T-H, Jeong Y-I, Jin S-G, Pei J, Jung T-Y, Moon K-
S, et al. Preparation of polylactide-co-glycolide
nanoparticles incorporating celecoxib and their
antitumor activity against brain tumor cells. Int J
Nanomedicine 2011;6:2621-31.
[image]

[image]
2024 ©️ Galenos Publishing House