International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
Hydrophobic ion pair formation between leuprolide and
sodium oleate for sustained release from biodegradable
polymeric microspheres
Seung Ho Choi, Tae Gwan Park*
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Ad6anced Institute of Science and Technology, 373-1 Kusong-dong, Yusong-gu,
Taejon 305-701, South Korea
Received 24 January 2000; received in revised form 28 April 2000; accepted 23 May 2000
Abstract
Leuprolide acetate, an analogue of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH), was hydrophobically ion
paired with a long chain fatty acid, sodium oleate, in an aqueous solution. Solution behaviors of the complex formed
between leuprolide and sodium oleate were investigated in terms of aqueous solubility, turbidity, particle size, and
zeta potential as a function of molar ratio between the two species. It was found that with increasing the
stoichiometric molar amounts of sodium oleate to leuprolide approached up to 2.5–3, the solution became gradually
turbid with increasing particle sizes, indicating leuprolide precipitation as a result of hydrophobic ion pairing. On the
other hand, beyond that critical molar ratio range, the solution turned into clear with much reduced particle size,
indicative of micelle formation. The hydrophobically modiﬁed leuprolide–oleate complex was lyophilized and directly
encapsulated within biodegradable poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microspheres via a single oil-in-water
(O/W) emulsion method. Microsphere morphology, leuprolide release behavior, and polymer mass erosion proﬁles
were examined in comparison to the PLGA microspheres prepared with free leuprolide. © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V.
All rights reserved.
Keywords: Leuprolide acetate; PLGA; Microspheres; Hydrophobic ion pairing
www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpharm
1. Introduction
Leuprolide acetate is a synthetic analogue of
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH),
which acts as a potent agonist towards anterior
pituitary receptor (Plosker and Brogden, 1994;
Kutscher et al., 1997). For its sustained release
purpose, the formulations of biodegradable mi-
crospheres were developed to treat prostate cancer
and endometriosis for 1- or 3-month treatment by
a single subcutaneous or intra-muscular injection
(Redding et al., 1984; Okada et al., 1988, 1991;
Okada et al. 1994a,b). Commercially available
formulation was based on a double emulsion sol-
vent evaporation method. Since leuprolide acetate
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +82-42-8692621; fax: +82-
42-8692610.
E-mail address: tgpark@sorak.kaist.ac.kr (T.G. Park).
0378-5173/00/$ - see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0378-5173(00)00457-9

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
194
is a water-soluble peptide, leuprolide was ﬁrst
dissolved in a small volume of aqueous solution,
emulsiﬁed in an organic solvent phase containing
polymer, and then re-emulsiﬁed in a large volume
of aqueous phase (Ogawa et al., 1988). Its limited
solubility in various organic solvents could be
disadvantageous with respect to microsphere for-
mulation development. It is desirable to prepare
PLGA microspheres by using a single oil-in-water
emulsion method, in which the drug to be encap-
sulated and polymer should be dissolved together
in the same organic solvent.
The hydrophobic ion pairing of various protein
molecules with surface-active agents was reported
(Kendrick et al., 1997; Meyer and Manning,
1998). It has been used for non-aqueous enzyme
reactions, selective bioseparations, and enhanced
protein stability in organic solvent phase. Major
advantages of hydrophobic ion pairing are to
increase the lipophilicity of hydrophilic macro-
molecules (Matsuura et al., 1993; Meyer et al.,
1995). By ionic pairing between peptides or
proteins, and amphipathic molecules, it was sug-
gested that hydrophobically modiﬁed peptides or
proteins might increase an absorption efﬁciency
through mucosal membrane present in a nasal or
oral route (Imanidis et al., 1995). Leuprolide is
composed of nine amino acids and has two ioniz-
able basic side chains, imidazole group of His
(pKa6.0) and guanidine group of Arg (pKa
13.0). Thus, hydrophobic ion pairing of leuprolide
with various acidic amphipathic molecules such as
a series of alkyl sulfonates with different carbon
numbers was attempted to enhance its lipophilic
partition coefﬁcient (Adjei and Hsu, 1993).
In this study, leuprolide and sodium oleate,
chosen as an acidic amphipathic surface-active
agent, were combined to increase the lipophilicity
of the leuprolide via hydrophobic ion pairing. The
ion pairing behaviors in aqueous solution were
investigated by aqueous solubility change, particle
size of water insoluble fraction, its zeta potential
as a function of molar ratio between leuprolide
and sodium oleate. After the optimization of ion
pairing process, the resultant leuprolide–oleate
complex was freeze-dried. The complex dissolved
in a mixture of organic solvents was encapsulated
within PLGA microspheres by using a single oil-
in-water emulsion solvent evaporation method.
Release proﬁle of leuprolide from microspheres,
stability, microsphere morphology, and erosion
proﬁle were compared to those of PLGA micro-
spheres prepared by the encapsulation of free
leuprolide acetate.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Leuprolide acetate was obtained from Dong
Kook Pharmaceutical Co. (Seoul, Korea). Two
poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) having lactic/gly-
colic molar ratio of 50/50, Resomer RG502 and
RG502H, were purchased from Boehringer Ingel-
heim. RG502 was an end-capped PLGA with
weight average molecular weight of 12 000 and
RG502H was an end-uncapped PLGA with that
of
8600.
Polyvinyl
alcohol
(PVA),
88%
hy-
drolyzed, average molecular weight of 31 000–
50 000 and sodium oleate were from Sigma. All
other chemical reagents were of analytical grade.
2.2. Hydrophobic ion pairing
Various concentrations of sodium oleate in
deionized water ranging from 0.21 to 1.65 mg/ml
were slowly added in a dropwise manner into 5 ml
of 1.67 mg/ml of leuprolide acetate dissolved in
deionized water, which corresponds to the sodium
oleate/leuprolide molar ratio range from 0.5 to
4.0. Under continuous agitation at room tempera-
ture, a cloudy solution was spontaneously devel-
oped as a result of the complex formation.
2.3. Characterization of hydrophobically
ion-paired complex
The formation of water insoluble ion paired
complex between leuprolide and sodium oleate at
various oleate/leuprolide molar ratios was traced
by monitoring the transmittance of solution at
500 nm by using a spectrophotometer. After the
hydrophobic ion pairing, water-soluble fraction of
leuprolide (aqueous solubility) was determined by
measuring its concentration remaining in the su-

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
195
pernatant after centrifugation at 3000 rpm. The
concentration of leuprolide was determined by
measuring UV absorbance at 280 nm based on a
series of leuprolide acetate concentrations as cali-
bration standards. Size and zeta potential of ion
paired complex particles in aqueous solution were
determined by a dynamic light scattering instru-
ment
(Zetaplus,
Brookhaven,
New
York)
equipped with a He–Ne laser at a wavelength of
632.2 nm.
2.4. Microsphere preparation
Suspended leuprolide–oleate complex particles
in the aqueous solution, which was formed at 1:1
molar ratio, were directly freeze-dried. PLGA mi-
crospheres were prepared by an oil-in-water (O/
W)
single
emulsion
technique.
For
the
encapsulation of leuprolide–oleate complex, 124.8
mg of the freeze-dried complex dissolved in 0.75
ml of a water miscible organic co-solvent, N-
methyl-2-pyrrolidinone, was combined with 700
mg
of
the
PLGA
blend
mixture
(RG502H:RG502=3:1 weight ratio) dissolved in
2.25 ml of methylene chloride. For the encapsula-
tion of free leuprolide acetate, 100 mg of leupro-
lide acetate was used. The above clear solution
was brieﬂy emulsiﬁed in 250 ml of 0.5% (w/v)
PVA solution for 5 min by homogenization using
a PowerGen 700 (Fisher Scientiﬁc) and subse-
quently stirred magnetically for 3 h at room tem-
perature to evaporate the methylene chloride. The
hardened microspheres were collected, washed
three times with deionized water, and then freeze-
dried.
2.5. Characterization of microspheres
The amount of leuprolide acetate encapsulated
within PLGA microspheres was determined by
dissolving 10 mg of freeze-dried microspheres in 1
ml
of
dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO).
Leuprolide
concentration in the solution was then measured
by detecting UV absorbance at 280 nm. A stan-
dard calibration curve was constructed by dissolv-
ing different leuprolide acetate amounts dissolved
in DMSO. Surface and cross-sectional morpholo-
gies of PLGA microspheres were observed by
scanning
electron
microscopy
(SEM,
Philips
535M). Dry microspheres were coated with gold
particles by using a sputter-coater (Hammer V,
Technics, USA).
2.6. In 6itro release studies
Seven mg of freeze-dried microspheres, in du-
plicate, was suspended in 1.5 ml of 33 mM phos-
phate buffered saline (PBS) solution, pH 7.4,
containing 0.01% (w/v) sodium azide and 0.02%
(w/v)
Tween
80.
They
were
incubated
in
a
polypropylene tube at 37°C in a shaking incuba-
tor. The microspheres incubated for predeter-
mined
time
intervals
were
recovered
after
removing supernatant by centrifugation and then
freeze-dried. The remaining leuprolide amount
within the microspheres was determined by dis-
solving them in DMSO as described above. The
mass erosion of microspheres during the release
period was determined based on the dry weight
difference of microspheres before and after the
incubation as a function of time. The gravimetri-
cal measurements were performed in duplicate
with the accuracy of 90.1 mg. Stability of the
released leuprolide in the supernatant was ana-
lyzed by high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) operated by the following conditions:
reversed phase C-18 column (Waters); isocratic
elution of a mobile phase composed of 68/32
volume ratio of deionized water/acetonitrile con-
taining 0.1% (w/v) triﬂuoroacetic acid; UV detec-
tion at 220 nm (Shameem et al., 1999).
3. Results and discussion
The complex formation between leuprolide ace-
tate and sodium oleate was carried out in deion-
ized water (pH 5–6) at room temperature to
minimize the effect of buffer salt ions on the ionic
interaction between the two species. Because the
nature of ion pair formation between the two
species was weak acid–base interactions, the com-
plex formation was very sensitive to environmen-
tal conditions such as temperature, pH, and ionic
strength. The slow addition of sodium oleate to
the
leuprolide
acetate
solution
gradually
de-

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
196
creased the medium pH with concomitant forma-
tion of white precipitates in the solution. Fig. 1
shows the transmittance change of the solution as
a function of molar ratio between sodium oleate
and leuprolide acetate. It can be seen that the
transmittance, as a measure of solution turbidity
observed by scattering intensity of the solution at
500 nm, sharply decreases at the relative molar
ratio of oleate to leuprolide at 0.5 and maintains
the lowest values until the molar ratio reaches to
2.5. Then, transmittance value increases up to 3
and the clear solution was observed thereafter.
This clearly indicates that oleate was bound to
leuprolide by ionic interaction between oppositely
charged groups. Leuprolide has two basic amino
acid groups in the peptide chain, to which a
negatively charged carboxylic acid group in oleate
was bound in a stoichiometric manner of two
oleate molecules per leuprolide (Adjei et al.,
1993). Approaching the gradual occupation of the
binding sites in leuprolide with oleate, aqueous
solubility of the complex was gradually reduced.
As a result, water insoluble complexes tended to
aggregate with each other and formed light scat-
tering particulates. Upon further addition of ex-
cessive
oleate
molecules
beyond
the
binding
saturation point, the complex particulates being
hydrophobically ion paired tended to dissociate
into individual micelles. The micelle formation
appears to complete above the oleate/leuprolide
molar ratio value of 3.
Aqueous solubility of leuprolide as a function
of oleate/leuprolide molar ratio is shown in Fig. 2.
The leuprolide solubility decreases until reaching
the molar ratio value of 3 and then regained after
that point. This is in agreement with the solution
turbidity result as shown in Fig. 1. Obviously, the
micellization of leuprolide–oleate complex oc-
curred with sufﬁcient addition of oleate, which
resulted in the enhanced aqueous solubility again.
Although the stoichiometric binding number of
oleate molecules to leuprolide molecule is ex-
pected to be two, the regaining aqueous solubility
was observed on increasing the oleate/leuprolide
molar ratio value above three. This might be due
to the fact that for an efﬁcient micellar solubiliza-
tion, additional amount of sodium oleate are
needed above its critical micelle concentration (3.5
mM at 50°C) in the aqueous solution (Taylor and
Princen, 1979).
The formation of complex, existing as water
insoluble
suspended
particulates
in
aqueous
medium, was traced by measuring their size and
zeta potential at different oleate/leuprolide molar
ratios. This is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that
the variation of particle sizes depends on the
oleate/leuprolide molar ratio in accordance with
the results of turbidity and solubility as shown in
Figs. 1 and 2. The average size of particles formed
Fig. 1. Transmittance change of the solution in which leupro-
lide acetate and Na–oleate were complexed.
Fig. 2. The amount of free leuprolide acetate which was not
hydrophobically ion paired with Na–oleate with increasing the
Na–oleate/leuprolide molar ratios.

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
197
Fig. 3. Zeta potential (mV) and dynamic light scattering (nm)
of leuprolide–oleate ionic complex as a function of Na–
oleate/leuprolide acetate molar ratio. 	, zeta potential; ",
dynamic light scattering.
celles did not have a spherical shape with a
deﬁned size below 100 nm, but formed large
particles in the shape of cylindrical rods or lamel-
lar disks, and additionally they were very unstable
in aqueous solution due to the incorporated
leuprolide (Hiemenz, 1986). A schematic represen-
tation of leuprolide/oleate complex formation is
shown in Fig. 4.
The leuprolide–oleate complex prepared upon
mixing at 1:1 molar ratio in aqueous solution was
directly freeze-dried and then used for the mi-
croencapsulation within PLGA microspheres. At
this leuprolide–oleate mixing ratio, leuprolide was
not completely ion paired by oleate molecules and
may exist mainly as a soluble complex in the
solution as shown in Fig. 2. Using an excess
amount of sodium oleate for the formation of
ion-paired complex was not desirable for the for-
mulation of PLGA microspheres because of its
surfactant action. Thus, 1:1 mixing ratio was se-
lected for the microencapsulation. A PLGA blend
system consisting of RG502H and RG502 at the
weight ratio of 3:1 was used to prepare a 1-month
leuprolide release system by controlling the poly-
mer erosion rate, which was established in our
preliminary experiments. The microspheres were
prepared
by
a
single
oil-in-water
emulsion
method, in which oil phase was composed of a
binary co-solvent mixture of nonpolar methylene
chloride and a water miscible polar solvent, N-
methyl-2-pyrrolidinone. Table 1 shows formula-
tion conditions and characteristics of two PLGA
microspheres prepared by using leuprolide–oleate
complex and free leuprolide. The PLGA micro-
at stoichiometric binding between oleate and
leuprolide is 300 nm. Observing a decreasing
trend in particle size can be clear evidence of
micellar solubilization at higher oleate/leuprolide
molar ratios. Zeta potential as a measure of parti-
cle surface charge decreases concomitantly with
increasing the gradual increment of oleate amount
in the aqueous medium. It should be mentioned
that it was difﬁcult to obtain reliable size results
of the expected micelles above the leuprolide/
oleate molar ratio value of 3, although the solu-
tion
became
transparent.
Effective
diameter
values of micelles as measured by dynamic light
scattering ﬂuctuated to a great extent. This is
probably because the spontaneously generated mi-
Fig. 4. Schematic illustration of leuprolide acetate — Na–oleate hydrophobic ion pairing.

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
198
Table 1
Preparation and characterization of PLGA microspheres
Polymer Weight
Na–oleate (mg)
CH2Cl2 (ml)
Cosolventa (ml)
Average particle
Drug loading
Leup. (mg)
Encapsulation
efﬁciency (%)c
(%, w/w)
RG502H/RG502
size (mm)b
(mg)
3.00
0.60
5.6
9.4
75.3
525/175
Free leup.
100
–
0.75
10.5
11.7
96.3
2.25
525/175
100
24.84
Leup.–oleate
complex
a N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone.
b Determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
c Actual loading/theoretical loadingc100.

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
199
Fig. 5. SEM pictures of free leuprolide acetate (left panel) and leuprolide–oleate ionic complex (right panel) encapsulated
microspheres. Surface (a, b), cross-sectional view (c, d), degradation for 8 days in the aqueous media (e, f).
spheres encapsulated with the complex leuprolide
exhibited higher loading amount and greater en-
capsulation efﬁciency than those with free leupro-
lide. This may be due to the limited water
solubility of the leuprolide/oleate complex in wa-
ter, which prevented the diffusion escape of water-
soluble
leuprolide
from
the
embryonic
microspheres during the solvent evaporation pro-
cess. Both of the PLGA microspheres have similar
size distribution as determined by SEM.
Fig. 5 shows SEM pictures of the two PLGA
microspheres encapsulated with the complex and
free leuprolide. Surface morphologies of the two
microspheres degraded for 8 days in the aqueous
medium are also shown. Surface and cross-sec-
tional morphologies of the microspheres encapsu-
lated with free leuprolide are very smooth and
dense, whereas those of the microspheres encapsu-
lated with the complex are porous and rugged
internal structure with smooth surface, although

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
200
both of the microspheres were prepared by a
single emulsion method. The internal morphologi-
cal difference between the two microspheres can
be attributed to the different volume ratios of the
two solvents, methylene chloride and water mis-
cible N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone in the organic
phase used for the generation of single emulsion.
The use of water miscible solvents in the organic
phase tends to generate more porous micro-
spheres as a result of preferential escaping ten-
dency of the polar solvent into the aqueous
medium to water immiscible solvent, methylene
chloride. The effect of solvent composition on the
morphology of microspheres was described in de-
tail in our previous study (Crotts and Park, 1995).
Release proﬁles of leuprolide from the two mi-
crospheres are shown in Fig. 6. The release proﬁ-
les were determined by measuring remaining
leuprolide amount within the microspheres after
dissolving them in DMSO. It can be seen that the
formulation prepared with the leuprolide–oleate
complex signiﬁcantly suppresses the initial burst
release of leuprolide (10% after one day incu-
bation) from the microspheres in contrast to that
prepared with free leuprolide. This result can be
easily understandable because hydrophobically
modiﬁed leuprolide in the complex had much
smaller aqueous solubility than free leuprolide.
However, both of the formulations exhibit similar
leuprolide release proﬁles after the burst and show
fairly constant release patterns up to 30 days. It
can be surmised that for the microspheres pre-
pared with the complex, oleate molecules initially
ionically bound to leuprolide were slowly leached
out in the aqueous medium upon incubation. This
might lead to the no discernible difference in the
release proﬁles after the early stage of incubation.
Weak interactions between leuprolide and oleate
species within microspheres might be prone to
dissociate by slight changes of microenvironment
pH and ionic strength induced by polymer degra-
dation. The constant leuprolide release proﬁles
can be explained by passive diffusion mechanism
in the early stage, which was coupled with en-
hanced matrix erosion in the later stage (O’Don-
nell
and
McGinity,
1997).
Additionally,
ion
exchange mechanism between basic side chain
groups of amino acids in leuprolide and terminal
carboxylic
acid
groups
of
hydrolyzed
PLGA
chains might play an important role in controlling
the release as suggested earlier (Okada et al.,
1994a; Okada et al. 1994b). Mass erosion proﬁles
of the two microspheres are shown in Fig. 7.
There are no apparent differences in the mass
erosion rate, suggesting that the incorporation of
oleate within PLGA microspheres did not play a
role in affecting the PLGA degradation. Both of
the microspheres exhibit an initial latent lag pe-
riod of 5 days before starting to the mass erosion
Fig. 6. Leuprolide acetate release proﬁles from free leuprolide
acetate encapsulated microsphere and leuprolide–oleate ionic
complex microspheres.
Fig. 7. Mass erosion proﬁles from free leuprolide acetate
encapsulated microspheres and leuprolide–oleate ionic com-
plex microspheres.

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
201
Fig. 8. Free leuprolide acetate RP-HPLC result (100 mg/ml) (left), released leuprolide from free leuprolide acetate encapsulated
microspheres between day 20 and day 27 (a, 0.12%; b, 1.49%; c, 2.25%; d, 96.14%) (middle), released leuprolide from leuprolide/
oleate complex encapsulated microspheres between day 20 and day 27 (a, 1.12%; b, 1.16%; c, 97.27%) (right).
in accordance to a typical degradation behavior
of PLGA matrices as previously reported (Park,
1994). After 30 days of incubation, 60 wt.% of
the polymer mass was eroded, while about 90% of
initially loaded leuprolide within the microspheres
was released in the same period. The leuprolide
release proﬁles presented in this study are almost
similar to those of commercially available formu-
lation. Fig. 8 shows the HPLC chromatograms of
released leuprolide in the incubation medium,
which was collected at day 27. Both of the formu-
lations show similar chromatograms: 2–3 small
minor peaks and a major intact peak of leupro-
lide. The small peaks are thought to be caused by
chemical degradation reactions of leuprolide dur-
ing the release period. However, it seems that the
amount of the degradation products relative to
that of intact leuprolide is small enough and to
accept.
In conclusion, this study shows that leuprolide
could be complexed with a fatty acid salt, sodium
oleate in a manner of stoichiometric binding be-
tween
the
two
species.
The
hydrophobically
modiﬁed oleate–leuprolide complex gained more
lipophilicity
and
could
be
formulated
into
biodegradable PLGA microspheres based on a
single oil-in-water emulsion method. The micro-
spheres encapsulated with the complex demon-

S.H. Choi, T.G. Park / International Journal of Pharmaceutics 203 (2000) 193–202
202
strated reduced burst release, but showed a simi-
lar leuprolide release behavior and stability com-
pared to those encapsulated with free leuprolide.
Hydrophobic modiﬁcation of biologically active
molecules based on ion pairing mechanism can be
potentially applied for the sustained delivery of
other peptides and proteins, particularly reducing
an initial burst effect.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by a re-
search fund from Dong Kook Pharmaceutical Co.
(Seoul, Korea).
References
Adjei, A.L., Hsu, L., 1993. Leuprolide and other LH-RH
analogues. In: Wang, Y.J., Pearlman, R. (Eds.), Stability
and
Characterization
of
Protein
and
Peptide
Drugs.
Plenum Press, New York, pp. 159–199.
Adjei, A.L., Rao, S., Garren, J., Menon, G., Vadnere, M.,
1993. Effect of ion-pairing on 1-octanol-water partitioning
of peptide drugs. I: The nonapeptide leuprolide acetate.
Int. J. Pharm. 90, 141–149.
Crotts, G., Park, T.G., 1995. Preparation of porous and
nonporous biodegradable polymeric hollow microspheres.
J. Controlled Release 35, 91–105.
Hiemenz, P.C., 1986. Principles of Colloid and Surface Chem-
istry. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 427–454.
Imanidis, G., Hartner, K.C., Mazer, N.A., 1995. Intestinal
permeation and metabolism of a model peptide (leupro-
lide) and mechanisms of permeation enhancement by non-
ionic surfactants. Int. J. Pharm. 120, 41–50.
Kendrick, B.S., Meyer, J.D., Matsuura, J.E., Carpenter, J.F.,
Manning, M.C., 1997. Hydrophobic ion pairing as a
method for enhancing structure and activity of lyophilized
subtilisin BPN% suspended in isooctane. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 347, 113–118.
Kutscher, B., Bernd, M., Beckers, T., Polymeropoulos, E.E.,
Engel, J., 1997. Chemistry and molecular biology in the
search for new LHRH antagonists: reviews. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. Engl. 36, 2148–2161.
Matsuura, J., Powers, M.E., Manning, M.C., Shefter, E.,
1993. Structure and stability of insulin dissolved in 1-oc-
tanol. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115, 1261–1264.
Meyer, J.D., Manning, M.C., 1998. Hydrophobic ion pairing:
altering the solubility properties of biomolecules: review.
Pharm. Res. 15, 188–193.
Meyer, J.D., Matsuura, J.E., Kendrick, B.S., Evans, E.S.,
Evans, G.J., Manning, M.C., 1995. Solution behavior of
a-Chymotrypson dissolved in nonpolar organic solvents
via hydrophobic ion pairing. Biopolymers 35, 451–456.
O’Donnell, P.B., McGinity, J.W., 1997. Preparation of micro-
spheres by the solvent evaporation technique. Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev. 28, 25–42.
Ogawa, Y., Yamamoto, M., Okada, H., Yashiki, T., Shi-
mamoto, T., 1988. A new technique to efﬁciently entrap
leuprolide acetate into microcapsules of polylactic acid or
copoly(lactic/glycolic) acid. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 36, 1095–
1103.
Okada, H., Heya, T., Ogawa, Y., Shimamoto, T., 1988. One-
month release injectable microcapsules of a luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone agonist (leuprolide acetate)
for treating experimental endometriosis in rats. J. Pharma-
col. Exp. Ther. 244, 744–750.
Okada, H., Heya, T., Ogawa, Y., Toguchi, H., Shimamoto, T.,
1991. Sustained pharmacological activities in rats following
single and repeated administration of once-a-month in-
jectable microsphere of leuprolide acetate. Pharm. Res. 8,
584–587.
Okada, H., Doken, Y., Ogawa, Y., Toguchi, H., 1994. Sus-
tained
suppression
of
the
pituitary–gonadal
axis
by
leuprelin three-month depot microspheres in rats and dogs.
Pharm. Res. 11, 1199–1203.
Okada, H., Yamamoto, M., Heya, T., Inoue, Y., Kamei, S.,
Ogawa, Y., Toguchi, H., 1994. Drug delivery using
biodegradable microspheres. J. Controlled Release 28,
121–129.
Park, T.G., 1994. Degradation of poly(D,L-lactic acid) micro-
spheres: effect of molecular weight. J. Controlled Release
30, 161–173.
Plosker, G.L., Brogden, R.N., 1994. Leuprorelin. A review of
its pharmacology and therapeutic use in prostatic cancer,
endometriosis and other sex hormone-related disorders.
Drugs 48, 930–967.
Redding, T.W., Schally, A.V., Tice, T.R., Meyers, W.E., 1984.
Long-acting delivery systems for peptides: Inhibition of rat
prostate tumors by controlled release of [D-Trp6]luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone from injectable microcapsules.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 5845–5848.
Shameem, M., Lee, H., Deluca, P.P., 1999. A short-term
(accelerated release) approach to evaluate peptide release
from PLGA depot formulations. PharmSci. 1, serial on the
internet.
Taylor, M.A., Princen, L.H., 1979. Fatty acids in solution. In:
Pryde,
E.H.
(Ed.),
Fatty
acids.
The
American
Oil
Chemists’ Society, Champaign, IL, pp. 195–217.
.