Biomedical Materials

PAPER • OPEN ACCESS
Incorporation and release of dual growth factors
for nerve tissue engineering using nanofibrous
bicomponent scaffolds
To cite this article: Chaoyu Liu et al 2018 Biomed. Mater. 13 044107

View the article online for updates and enhancements.
You may also like
Magnetization dynamics in quasiperiodic
magnonic crystals
Riya Mehta, Bivas Rana and Susmita
Saha
-
Effect of sea component dissolution on
fibrous structure of islands-in-the-sea
spunbond nonwovens
F Suvari, Y Ulcay and B Pourdeyhimi
-
Development of fiber-based piezoelectric
sensors for the load monitoring of
dynamically stressed fiber-reinforced
composites
Hung Le Xuan, Eric Haentzsche, Andreas
Nocke et al.
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 129.2.89.164 on 22/10/2025 at 17:38

Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-605X/aab693
PAPER
Incorporation and release of dual growth factors for nerve tissue
engineering using nanoﬁbrous bicomponent scaffolds
Chaoyu Liu1,2,5
, Chong Wang3, Qilong Zhao4, Xiaohua Li2, Feiyue Xu2, Xumei Yao2 and Min Wang1
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
2 Department of Research and Development, Shenzhen Gene Health Bio Tech Co., Ltd, Shenzhen, 518055, People’s Republic of China
3 School of Mechanical Engineering, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, Guangdong, 523808, People’s Republic of China
4 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen, 518055, People’s Republic of China
5 Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: liuchaoyu@vienomics.com and memwang@hotmail.com
Keywords: dual-source dual-power electrospinning, bicomponent scaffold, in vitro release, in vitro degradation, growth factors
Abstract
Electrospun ﬁbrous scaffolds have been extensively used as cell-supporting matrices or delivery
vehicles for various biomolecules in tissue engineering. Biodegradable scaffolds with tunable
degradation behaviors are favorable for various resorbable tissue replacements. In nerve tissue
engineering, delivery of growth factors (GFs) such as nerve growth factor (NGF) and glial cell line-
derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) from scaffolds can be used to promote peripheral nerve repair.
In this study, using the established dual-source dual-power electrospinning technique, bicompo-
nent scaffolds incorporated with NGF and GDNF were designed and demonstrated as a strategy to
develop scaffolds providing dual GF delivery. NGF and GDNF were encapsulated in poly(D, L-lactic
acid) (PDLLA) and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoﬁbers, respectively, via emulsion
electrospinning. Bicomponent scaffolds with various mass ratios of GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers to
NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers were fabricated. Their morphology, structure, properties, and the in vitro
degradation were examined. Both types of core–shell structured ﬁbers were evenly distributed in
bicomponent scaffolds. Robust scaffolds with varying component ratios were fabricated with
average ﬁber diameter ranging from 307±100 nm to 688±129 nm. The ultimate tensile stress
and elastic modulus could be tuned ranging from 0.23±0.07 MPa to 1.41±0.23 MPa,
11.1±3.0 MPa to 75.9±3.3 MPa, respectively. Adjustable degradation was achieved and the
weight loss of scaffolds ranged from 9.2% to 44.0% after 42 day degradation test. GDNF and NGF
were incorporated with satisfactory encapsulation efﬁciency and their bioactivity were well
preserved. Sustained release of both types of GFs was also achieved.
1. Introduction
Biodegradable polymers including poly(D, L-lactic
acid) (PDLLA) and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
have been employed for various biomedical applica-
tions such as tissue engineering scaffolds and delivery
systems with controlled release. Biodegradable bioma-
terials are favorable with appropriate degradation time,
mechanical properties and supply of biomolecular
stimuli to match the healing or regeneration process.
Considering the unique requirements for speciﬁc
medical application, a combination of biodegradable
materials may be adopted as a strategy to perform
collaborativelyand accomplishcomplex tasks.
Electrospinning and as-spun ﬁbrous scaffolds
have attracted great attention owing to its ease of
operation, feasibility with various natural and synth-
etic polymers, structural resemblance with the extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) and excellent cell response
[1–3]. Biomolecules or drugs can also be incorporated
in electrospun scaffolds to improve their biological
functionality [4, 5]. However, there is concern about
incorporation efﬁciency of biomolecules through tra-
ditional electrospinning due to potential exposure of
biomolecules to organic solvent and resultant destabi-
lization and denaturation. Emulsion electrospinning
has been employed as an efﬁcient method to preserve
the bioactivity of incorporated biomolecules, which
OPEN ACCESS
RECEIVED
28 November 2017
REVISED
1 March 2018
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
14 March 2018
PUBLISHED
4 May 2018
Original content from this
work may be used under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 3.0
licence.
Any further distribution of
this work must maintain
attribution to the
author(s) and the title of
the work, journal citation
and DOI.
© 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd

could also help alleviate the burst release and provide a
sustained release of biomolecules [6, 7].
In neural tissue engineering, repairing of periph-
eral nerve injuries is a major challenge in reconstruc-
tive surgery. Peripheral nerves can regenerate to some
extent after surgical nerve repair. However, appro-
priate device for bridging and guiding axons is neces-
sary when there is a severe nerve defect [8]. Due to the
limited availability of donor nerves and function loss
of donor site, autografting is greatly hampered [9]. In
recent years, tissue engineering scaffold-based nerve
guide conduits have been extensively studied as a pro-
mising alternative. These artiﬁcial scaffolds and scaf-
fold-based
conduits
are
able
to
guide
axonal
elongation and neurite outgrowth [10–12], and can
also serve as a reservoir of biological cues, such as lami-
nin and growth factors [13, 14]. Local delivery of neu-
rotrophic factors including nerve growth factor (NGF)
and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
at surgical sites have been proposed to enhance per-
ipheral nerve regeneration. These neurotrophic fac-
tors play important roles in neuronal survival,
neural differentiation, and axonal regeneration inde-
pendently or synergistically at different effective
concentrations [15–20]. Sustained stimulation of neu-
rotrophic factors is also required to induce neural dif-
ferentiation [21], which is the physiological reason for
choosing these growth factors. Continuous supple-
mentation and co-administration of GDNF and NGF
promoted axonal elongation and branching synergis-
tically [20]. Considering the complexity of the whole
system with speciﬁc requirements for mechanical,
chemical and physiological properties, the production
of an ‘ideal’ implantable and biocompatible scaffolds
or conduits for peripheral nerve tissue repair is chal-
lenging. The driving hypothesis of this study is that
whether nanoﬁbrous scaffolds with dual growth factor
release capability and a bi-phasic degradation behavior
could be fabricated through the dual-source dual-
power electrospinning (DSDP-ES), which might be
promising for designing tissue engineering scaffolds
with dual release capability. Nanoﬁbrous scaffolds
having NGF-loaded PDLLA ﬁbrous component and
GDNF-loaded PLGA ﬁbrous component might be
advantageous in simultaneously realizing neurite out-
growth and neural differentiation.
In this work, ﬁbrous bicomponent scaffolds were
designed and fabricated through DSDP-ES technique
[22], with NGF and GDNF incorporated into PDLLA
and PLGA nanoﬁbers, respectively, via emulsion elec-
trospinning. The mass ratios of GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers to
NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers in bicomponent scaffolds were
varied through a multiple-syringe strategy. The
morphology, structure and properties of produced
scaffolds were investigated. The encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency (EE) of NGF and GDNF in produced scaffolds
and their release proﬁles were determined. Rat adrenal
pheochromocytoma (PC12) cell line was used to assess
the bioactivity of growth factors (GFs) released from
ﬁbrous scaffolds. The in vitro degradation of ﬁbrous
scaffolds and degradation mechanisms were also
investigated.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
PLGA (LA:GA=50:50) and PDLLA with molecular
weight of 100 kDa (as indicated by their inherent
viscosity 0.6–0.8 dl g−1) were purchased from Lake-
shore Biomaterials, USA. Chloroform was supplied by
Uni Chem Co., Korea. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
was supplied by Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., US. The human
β-NGF with Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay
(ELISA) Kit, human GDNF with ELISA Kit were
purchased from Peprotech Inc. and R&D Systems,
Inc., respectively. Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium
(DMEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/strep-
tomycin (P/S) and trypsin/EDTA were purchased
from Invitrogen, Inc., USA. Mouse anti-neuroﬁla-
ment (M+H) primary antibody, goat anti-mouse
IgG secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor® 594), phalloidin
(Alexa Fluor® 488) and DAPI (4’,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole) were purchased from Life Technolo-
gies. Triton X-100, Span 80, phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) tablets, heparin, bovine serum albumin (BSA)
and paraformaldehyde were Sigma-Aldrich products.
Other chemicals were used as received.
2.2. Fabrication of scaffolds
The ﬁbrous scaffolds incorporated with GFs were
fabricated by emulsion electrospinning. For water-in-oil
(water/oil) emulsion formulation, PLGA/chloroform or
PDLLA/chloroform solution with a certain concentra-
tion was used as the oil phase whereas NGF or GDNF
was dissolved in 0.5 wt% BSA solution as the water
phase. The volume ratio of the oil phase to the water
phase was ﬁxed at 10:1. 5 wt% of Span-80 (with respect
to the weight of polymer used) was added in the polymer
solutionfortheformationandstabilizationofemulsions.
The oil phase and water phase were mixed for 10 min
through magnetic stirring at 300 rpm to form homo-
geneous water/oil emulsions. Polymer concentration
was optimized both for PLGA and PDLLA and served as
control variable to manipulate ﬁber diameter. The
electrospinning parameters including applied voltage,
inner diameter of needle tip, needle-to-collector distance
and feeding rate of emulsions were optimized as 16 kV,
0.8 mm, 8 cm and 2 ml h−1, respectively. To produce
bicomponent nanoﬁbrous scaffolds, DSDP-ES was
employed (ﬁgure 1). GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and NGF/
PDLLAﬁberswerecollectedsimultaneouslybyarotating
drum collector, forming non-woven bicomponent scaf-
folds. By using a multiple-syringe strategy, the mass ratio
between GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers in
bicomponent scaffolds was adjusted. The formulation of
emulsions for producing different mono- and bicompo-
nent scaffolds was summarized in table 1. The produced
2
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

electrospun scaffolds were freeze-dried for 24 h before
anyfurtherexperiments.
2.3. Characterization of ﬁbers and electrospun
scaffolds
Morphological and structural characterization of elec-
trospun ﬁbers and fabricated scaffolds was conducted.
Freeze-dried samples of electrospun ﬁbers and scaf-
folds were sputtered with a thin gold coating for 30 s
by a sputter coater (BEL-TACSCD005) and their
morphology was examined using SEM (Hitachi
S-4800 FEG SEM, Japan). Electrospun ﬁbers were also
collected during electrospinning on a copper grid
covered with carbon ﬁlm and their structures were
observed using TEM (Philips EM208s TEM, the
Netherlands). Wettability of electrospun ﬁbrous scaf-
folds was investigated by measuring their water
contact angles (WCAs) at room temperature with a
WCA measuring machine (SL200B, Shanghai Solon
Tech Inc. Ltd, China). Measurements were performed
3 s after a DI water drop was placed on the sample
surface. Tensile tests were performed using a bench
top Instron mechanical testing machine (Model 5848,
USA) with a load cell of 10 N and a cross-head speed of
2 mm min−1. Each ﬁbrous scaffold with similar thick-
ness was cut into rectangular shape (5 mm×30 mm)
for testing. The ultimate tensile strength (UTS), elastic
modulus (EM) and elongation at break (EB) of scaffold
samples were determined according to the recorded
stress–strain curves. At least three replicates were
tested for each type of ﬁbrous scaffold and results were
expressed as mean±SD.
2.4. Encapsulation efﬁciency of GFs
The EE of NGF or GDNF in electrospun ﬁbers (and
hence scaffolds) was calculated using the equation:
E E
EE%
100%,
1
0
=
´
( )
/
where E is the actual amount of growth factor
encapsulated and E0 is the amount used for encapsula-
tion. The actual amount E was measured using an
extraction method. Brieﬂy, a scaffold sample (around
20 mg) was dissolved in 2 ml DMSO. 20 ml 0.05 M
NaOH solution with 0.5% Tween-20 was added to
form a mutually soluble mixture. Subsequently, 100 μl
of the emulsion were pipetted and the concentration
of NGF or GDNF was measured using corresponding
ELISA Kit for the growth factors.
2.5. In vitro release test of NGF and GDNF
For in vitro release investigations, experiments fol-
lowed the procedures as used by other research groups
[23]. Brieﬂy, scaffold samples (about 50 mg each) were
immersed in 12-well plates ﬁlled with 3 ml release
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the DSDP-ES setup for fabricating nonwoven bicomponent scaffolds.
Table 1. Composition of emulsions for producing nonwoven mono- and bicomponent
electrospun scaffolds.
GDNF/PLGA emulsions
NGF/PDLLA emulsions
Water phase
Oil phase
Water phase
Oil phase
Scaffold sample
1 ml H2O
10 ml CHCl3
1 ml H2O
10 ml CHCl3
G1 (0:1)
G1 (1:2)
G1 (1:1)
5 μg GDNF
1.5 g PLGA
5 μgNGF
2 g PDLLA
G1 (2:1)
5 mg BSA
75 μl Span-80
5 mg BSA
100 μl Span-80
G1 (1:0)
G2 (0:1)
G2 (1:2)
G2 (1:1)
4 μg GDNF
1.2 g PLGA
3.75 μg NGF
1.5 g PDLLA
G2 (2:1)
5 mg BSA
60 μl Span-80
5 mg BSA
75 μl Span-80
G2 (1:0)
3
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

medium and incubated in shaking water bath at 37 °C.
At pre-set times, 0.4 ml of supernatant was retrieved
from each well and replaced by 0.4 ml of fresh release
medium. The supernatant sample was frozen at
−20 °C for further measurement or directly used for
analysis. The concentration of growth factor in the
supernatant was determined using ELISA kit. The
release medium was prepared by adding 0.5% BSA,
0.05% Tween-20, 0.02% NaN3 and 0.1% heparin in
PBS solution.
2.6. Bioactivity assay of NGF and GDNF
The bioactivity of incorporated NGF and GDNF was
evaluated on a culture-to-culture basis. Brieﬂy, mono-
component scaffold GDNF/PLGA and NGF/PDLLA
scaffold samples (100 mg each) were sterilized by 60Co
γ-irradiation at a dose of 15 kGy before usage then
immersed in 10 ml DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemen-
ted with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
and incubated in shaking water bath at 37 °C for 24 h.
The concentration of released NGF or GDNF was
determined before the medium with released growth
factors was used and 10 ng ml−1 GDNF and 5 ng ml−1
NGF was used for further bioactivity comparison
study. As-received GFs were reconstituted in culture
medium at same concentration as comparison. About
8×103 PC12 cells (rat pheochromocytoma cell line,
Biowit Technologies, Shenzhen, China) were seeded
on glass slide in each well supplemented with 1 ml
culture medium at 37 °C and 5% CO2. After 1 day, the
culture medium was replaced by release medium or
reconstituted medium described above and refreshed
every 2 days. At day 1, 4, and 7, the cells were washed
twice with PBS and ﬁxed on the glass slides with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature.
After washing twice with PBS, the cells were permeabi-
lized with 0.1% Triton X-100 solution and incubated
in (1% w/v) BSA block solution for 30 min, followed
by the incubation in mouse anti-neuroﬁlament
(M+H) primary antibody (1:100 dilution) contain-
ing block solution for 1 h. After washing 2 times with
PBS, the cells were incubated with goat anti-mouse
IgG 594 secondary antibody (2 drops ml−1) for 30 min
FITC phalloidin (1:40 dilution) was simultaneously
added for the staining of F-actin and DAPI (1:1000
dilution) was added for the staining of nuclei. Confocal
imaging of cells was performed under a confocal
microscope (LSM 710, Carl Zeiss).
2.7. In vitro degradation tests
In vitro degradation tests of scaffolds were conducted
following established procedures. Each sample (about
20 mg)
was
accurately
weighed,
sterilized,
fully
immersed in 3 ml phosphate buffer solution (pH=7.4)
and placed in a separate container incubated in shaking
water bath at 37 °C. The degradation medium was
replaced with fresh PBS every 3 days. 0.02% NaN3 was
addedinPBSto preventbacterialgrowth.Atpresettime,
samples were taken out from degradation medium,
rinsed with distilled water for 3 times and lyophilized for
weight measurements. At least 3 repetitive samples were
taken at each time point. Morphology of degraded
scaffoldsampleswasalsoexaminedunderSEM.
2.8. Image analysis
SEM images were loaded into Image J (National
Institute of Health, USA) and 100 ﬁbers in each
scaffold were randomly selected to determine average
ﬁber diameters. Confocal microscopic images were
loaded into Image J and morphometric data were
obtained. The presence of neurites was examined and
cell differentiation was quantiﬁed by measuring the
neurite length. Only protrusions originating from the
cell body and longer than 28 μm (about two times of
average cell body diameter) were counted as neur-
ites [24].
2.9. Statistical analysis
The unpaired student t-test (for comparison of two
groups) was used for statistical analyses. Statistical
difference was condisdered at p<0.05.
3. Results
3.1. Surface morphology and wettability
PLGA and PDLLA-based mono- and bicomponent
nanoﬁbrous scaffolds with a thickness of approximate
500 μm were obtained through emulsion electrospin-
ning and DSDP-ES technique. The surface morph-
ology of ﬁbrous scaffolds as well as structures of
GDNF/PLGA and NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers are shown in
ﬁgure 2. The average ﬁber diameter and wettability of
each scaffold sample are shown in ﬁgures 3 and 4.
SEM images of mono- and bicomponent nanoﬁ-
bers showed a randomly interconnected structure and
smooth
surface
morphology
without
any
bead
(ﬁgure 2(a)). A uniform distribution of GDNF/PLGA
and NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers in bicomponent scaffold was
obtained. Through emulsion electrospinning, dis-
continuous core–shell structure was formed in both
GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers, which is
shown in ﬁgure 2(b). The water phase core was
enclosed by the polymer shell in both types of ﬁbers
but appeared differently. The phase boundary of core–
shell structure in PDLLA ﬁbers was unambiguous,
while it appeared in a dispersive pattern in PLGA
ﬁbers.
Fiber diameter of ﬁbrous scaffolds was varied by
changing polymer concentration during emulsion
electrospinning, which was 12% (w/v), 15% (w/v) for
PLGA and 15% (w/v), 20% (w/v) for PDLLA corre-
spondingly. Based on the ﬁber diameter, the ﬁbrous
scaffolds were divided into thick ﬁber group (G1
group, 15% (w/v) for PLGA and 20% (w/v) for
PDLLA) and thin ﬁber group (G2 group, 12% (w/v)
for PLGA and 15% (w/v) for PDLLA). The average
4
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

ﬁber diameter decreased from 688±129 nm to
447±107 nm, 502±102 nm to 307±100 nm in
G1 and G2 group, respectively, the ratio of GDNF/
PLGA ﬁbers to NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers increased from 0:1
to 1:0 (ﬁgure 3).
The static WCA of mono- and bicomponent
ﬁbrous scaffolds was measured and the shape of a
water droplet on each scaffold was captured by a
camera to determine the surface hydrophilicity/
hydrophobicity (ﬁgure 4). WCA of NGF/PDLLA
monocomponent scaffold, which was 137.0±3.3°
and 134.0±1.0° in G1 and G2 group, was much
higher than that of GDNF/PLGA scaffold which was
81.0±2.0° and 65.5±0.5°, respectively. The result
showed that the NGF/PDLLA scaffold was more
hydrophobic than GDNF/PLGA scaffold. Increasing
the GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA ﬁber ratio in
bicomponent scaffolds did not signiﬁcantly decrease
their surface hydrophobicity. The WCA value of G1
group was decreased as compared to G2 group,
Figure 2. Morphology and structures of electrospun ﬁbers and scaffolds: (a) SEM images of mono- and bicomponent ﬁbrous scaffolds,
(b) TEM images of core–shell structured NGF/PDLLA and GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and discontinuous core–shell structures were noted
with dashed ellipse.
5
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

suggesting that thinner ﬁber diameter could result in a
slight decrease of hydrophobicity.
3.2. Mechanical properties
Tensile tests of produced scaffolds were performed
and their UTS, EM and EB were determined using
obtained stress–strain curves (ﬁgure 5).
The results showed that UTS of scaffolds increased
from 0.30±0.08 MPa to 1.41±0.23 MPa in G1
group, 0.23±0.07 MPa to 1.34±0.21 MPa in G2
group as GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA ﬁber
ratio increased from 0:1 to 1:0 (ﬁgure 5(a)). Similar
trends were observed in EM and EB value. EM value
increased from 21.5±3.0 MPa to 75.9±3.3 MPa in
G1 group, 11.1±3.0 MPa to 53.5±4.0 MPa in G2
group as GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA ﬁber
ratio increased from 0:1 to 1:0 (ﬁgure 5(b)). EB value
increased from 34±8% to 112±16% in G1 group,
37±7% to 95±14% in G2 group as GDNF/PLGA
ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA ﬁber ratio increased from 0:1 to
1:0 (ﬁgure 5(c)). These results indicated that GDNF/
PLGA ﬁbrous scaffolds had much higher UTS, EM
and EB values comparing with NGF/PDLLA ones.
Increasing ﬁber diameter and GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to
NGF/PDLLA ﬁber ratio in bicomponent scaffolds
could both signiﬁcantly improve the mechanical
properties of ﬁbrous scaffolds.
3.3. Encapsulation efﬁciency of GFs and release
proﬁle of GFs
EE (in percentage) of GFs incorporated in ﬁbers was
measured using ELISA kits through an extraction
method and calculated using equation described
before and shown in ﬁgure 6. The EE of NGF was
Figure 3. Average ﬁber diameter in ﬁbrous scaffolds with different ﬁber component ratios. Fiber diameter in Group 1 statistically
different than that in Group 2 for respective PLGA/PDLLA ratios. *= p<0.05.
Figure 4. Water contact angle of mono- and bicomponent scaffolds. Water contact angle in Group 1 statistically different than that in
Group 2 for respective PLGA/PDLLA ratios. *= p<0.05.
6
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

85.3±3.0%,
86.8±2.2%,
86.2±2.8%,
and
88.2±2.9% in G1 group and 87.0±3.1%, 86.3±
2.4%, 87.6±2.6%, and 85.5±3.2% in G2 group,
corresponding to GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA
ﬁber ratio at 0:1, 1:2, 1:1, and 2:1, respectively. The EE
of GDNF was 83.0±2.8%, 79.6±2.9%, 82.6±
3.0%, and 81.0±3.0% in G1 group and 81.3±
2.7%, 80.7±2.4%, 79.1±2.3%, and 78.6±3.1%
in G2 group, corresponding to GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to
NGF/PDLLA ﬁber ratio at 1:2, 1:1, 2:1, and 1:0,
respectively. All the scaffolds achieved high EE of
growth factors which was above 79%, demonstrating
that PLGA and PDLLA nanoﬁbers fabricated by
emulsion electrospinning could be good delivery
vehicles for hydrophilic proteins. Regardless of the
component ratio and ﬁber diameter, the EE of NGF in
bicomponent ﬁbrous scaffolds was at the same level
with that in their monocomponent counterparts. This
observation was also made for the EE of GDNF,
although the average EE of GDNF was 80.7±1.6%,
slightly lower than that of NGF which was 86.6±
1.0%.
The release proﬁles of NGF and GDNF from
bicomponent scaffolds (G1 (1:1), G2 (1:1)) including
cumulative release amount and cumulative release
percentage of GFs were shown in ﬁgure 7. All scaffolds
exhibited similar release proﬁle including an initial
burst release within 24 h, followed by a much slower
Figure 5. Tensile properties of electrospun scaffolds: (a) ultimate tensile strength, (b) elastic modulus and (c) elongation at break. UTS,
EM and EB in Group 1 statistically different than that in Group 2 for respective PLGA/PDLLA ratios. *= p<0.05.
7
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

and sustained release. After 42 day release, the cumu-
lative release amount of NGF increased to 16.4±2.0
ng and 27.9±2.9 ng in G1 and G2 group,
respectively,
comparing
to
40.0±5.1
ng
and
58.2±4.9 ng of that of GDNF. The cumulative
release of NGF within 1 day reached 12.4% and 16.7%
Figure 6. Encapsulation efﬁciency of NGF and GDNF in mono- and bicomponent ﬁbrous scaffolds.
Figure 7. In vitro release of growth factors from bicomponent scaffolds with 1:1 component ratio of GDNF/PLGA to NGF/PDLLA
ﬁbers in 42 day release tests: (a) cumulative release amount of NGF and GDNF, (b) cumulative release percentage of GFs.
8
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

in G1 and G2, respectively, comparing to 20.3% and
26.6% of that of GDNF. After 42 days, the cumulative
release increased gradually to 26.5% and 34.8% in G1
and G2, respectively. As for GDNF, the cumulative
release ascended steadily, reaching 62.5% and 70.1%
in G1 and G2, respectively, after 42 days. The results of
in vitro release tests revealed that concurrent and sus-
tained release of NGF and GDNF could be successfully
achieved using bicomponent scaffolds made by
DSDP-ES. The release rate of GDNF was much faster
than that of NGF. Thicker ﬁber diameter could help
alleviate the initial burst release and slow down the
release rate of both growth factors.
3.4. Bioactivity assay of incorporated GFs
In order to assess the bioactivity of GFs incorporated
in ﬁbrous scaffolds, morphology of PC12 cells cul-
tured with different neurotrophic factor medium was
examined by CLSM at different culture time and is
shown in ﬁgure 8. GDNF-release group and NGF-
release group represented that cells were cultured with
medium containing GDNF and NGF released from
their corresponding monocomponent scaffolds. In
GDNF-control
and
NGF-control
groups,
virgin
GDNF and NGF were used, respectively.
As shown in ﬁgure 8, cells adhered and spread well,
showing a spindle-like shape on glass slides in all
groups at day 1. With the stimulation of GDNF, cells
exhibited with neurite sprouting and improved neur-
ite elongation in random directions as neurite protru-
sions were evident by observing morphology of
F-actin ﬁlaments (stained with phalloidin in green) in
GDNF-release group at day 4. Weak signals of intra-
cellular neuroﬁlaments (stained in red) were also
noticed. At day 7, more polarized cells bearing neurite
outgrowth and further elongated neurite protrusions
were found. Neurite branching was not observed.
Cells in GDNF-control group behaved similarly as
neurite sprouting and elongation was found at day 4
and enhanced neurite outgrowth was also observed at
day 7. Similar results were found in NGF-release
group and NGF-control group. The addition of
released NGF and virgin NGF both promoted neurite
outgrowth and cell differentiation, although the NGF
concentration used was half of GDNF concentration.
To quantify the bioactivity of GFs and their effects
on cells, neurite outgrowth and neural differentiation
percentages were determined and are shown in ﬁgure 9.
Neurite length was deﬁned as the distance between cell
body and distant end of neurite protrusion. Only cells
bearing neurite protrusions longer than 28 μm were
counted as differentiated cells. Normalized neurite
length is deﬁned as average neurite length of both differ-
entiated and undifferentiated cells in which the neurite
length of undifferentiated cells is assumed as 28 μm. At
day4,celldifferentiationpercentagesincreased to58.8%
and 70.3% in GDNF-release group and GDNF-control
group, respectively, as compared to 68.0% and 72.1% in
NGF-release group and NGF-control group, respec-
tively. At day 7, cell differentiation percentages further
increased to 86.7% and 96.0% in GDNF-release group
and GDNF-control group, respectively, as compared to
84.6% and 94.1% in NGF-release group and NGF-con-
trol group, respectively. In control group without the
addition of growth factors, cell differentiation percen-
tages barely changed and maintained at very low level.
Neurite length of cells in different groups is shown in
ﬁgure 9(b) and the dotted line insert represents neurite
length at the level of 28 μm. In GDNF-release group, the
averageneuritelengthwas36.3 μm and67.2 μmatday4
and 7, respectively. In comparison, the average neurite
length was 40.3 μm and 76.0 μm at day 4 and 7 in
GDNF-control group. The average neurite length was
38.2 μm and 59.4 μm in NGF-release group, corresp-
onding to 41.2 μm and 68.2 μm in NGF-control group
at day 4 and 7, respectively. There was no change in the
average neurite length in control group without addi-
tion of growth factors. These results revealed that
released GDNF and NGF both remained bioactive to a
large extent and promoted neural differentiation,
although the bioactivity of released growth factors was
marginally lower as compared to the bioactivity of virgin
growthfactors.
3.5. In vitro degradation behavior of growth factor-
incorporated scaffolds
The in vitro degradation tests of scaffolds with various
compositions were conducted. The weight losses of
scaffolds were monitored in the tests and results are
shown in ﬁgure 10. The remaining weight of each
sample decreased as immersion time increased. After
6 weeks, the weight loss of each sample was 9.4%,
16.4%, 18.2%, 21.2% and 44.0% in G1 group
(GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA ﬁber comp-
onent ratio increased from 0:1 to 1:0) and 9.2%,
16.3%, 22.0%, 24.0% and 39.5% in G2 group
correspondingly. The GDNF/PLGA monocompo-
nent scaffolds degraded much faster than the other
ones and the NGF/PDLLA monocomponent scaf-
folds had slowest degradation. The degradation rate
of bicomponent scaffolds increased with the increase
of GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/PDLLA ﬁber comp-
onent ratio. The degradation proﬁle was also affected
by diameter of ﬁbers in scaffolds. Generally, the
degradation rate of scaffolds with larger ﬁber dia-
meter (G1 group) was lower than that of scaffolds
with smaller ﬁber diameter (G2 group). The weight
loss of monocomponent PLGA scaffold in G1 group
was lower than that in G2 group in the ﬁrst 3 weeks;
however, it exceeded that in G2 group in the
subsequent period of degradation tests.
The morphology and structure of ﬁbers and scaf-
folds at 2, 4 and 6 week degradation times were exam-
ined and are shown in ﬁgure 11. In the ﬁrst 4 weeks,
9
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

Figure 8. Morphology of PC12 cells cultured with different growth-factor containing medium or with regular medium as control on
glass slides under confocal ﬂuorescent microscope.
10
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

monocomponent GDNF/PLGA scaffolds in G1 group
maintained ﬁbrous structure and mainly underwent
the process of ﬁber swelling and slight ﬁber fusion, fol-
lowed by ﬁber erosion. In the subsequent 2 weeks, the
scaffolds degraded much faster with scarcely any intact
ﬁber being observed, generating large pores and abun-
dant fragments. In comparison, monocomponent
GDNF/PLGA scaffolds in G2 group mainly under-
went the process of ﬁber swelling, ﬁber recoiling, ﬁber
fusion and erosion; and ﬁbrous structure could be
hardly noticed after 4 weeks. Monocomponent NGF/
PDLLA scaffolds behaved dramatically differently,
which underwent the process of ﬁber swelling and
slight ﬁber fusion and remained intact. In bicompo-
nent scaffolds, GDNF/PLGA and NGF/PDLLA com-
ponents could be easily differentiated. At long
degradation times, GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers lost ﬁbrous
morphology while NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers still main-
tained ﬁbrous morphology.
4. Discussion
Repairing severe peripheral nerve defects necessitates the
development of superior nerve guide conduits. Scaffold-
based nerve guide conduits loaded with GFs have
attracted great attention [20, 25, 26]. Sustained delivery
of GFs from elaborately designed scaffolds would be
beneﬁcialconsideringtheshorthalf-lifeofGFs.Fornerve
tissue regeneration, NGF and GDNF have been widely
employed owing to their potent effect on neural
responses and cell fate. In the current investigation, NGF
and GDNF were incorporated in bicomponent ﬁbrous
scaffoldsthroughDSDP-ESandsustainedandcontrolled
releaseofbothGFswasachieved.
4.1. Structure and properties of mono- and
bicomponent scaffolds
Electrospinning and as-spun scaffolds have been widely
employedintissueengineeringduetostructuralsimilarity
Figure 9. Bioactivity assessment of released NGF and GDNF comparing with virgin GFs: (a) differentiation percentages of PC12 cells,
(b) normalized neurite length of PC12 cells. (*, **, ***) Cell differentiation percentage and normalized neurite length in groups with
GFs statistically different than that in control group for respective culture days (*= p<0.05, **= p<0.01, ***= p<0.005); (#) cell
differentiation percentage and normalized neurite length in GDNF-release groups statistically different than that in GDNF-control
group for respective culture days (#= p<0.05); (@) cell differentiation percentage and normalized neurite length in NGF-release
groups statistically different than that in NGF-control group for respective culture days (@= p<0.05).
11
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

of as-spun scaffolds with ECM of human body tissues,
excellent cell response and capability of delivering func-
tional biomolecules in a controlled manner. Scaffolds
with different morphology and structures for diverse
applications can be achieved through various electrospin-
ning techniques. Core–shell structured ﬁbers produced
by emulsion electrospinning can be employed as deliver-
ing vehicles of subtle biomolecules, such as GFs. In the
current study, robust GDNF/PLGA and NGF/PDLLA
electrospun ﬁbers with smooth surface were made. The
formation of beadless ﬁbers indicated process stability
during emulsion electrospinning. Core–shell structure in
ﬁbers was conﬁrmed in both GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and
NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers (ﬁgure 2(b)) with discontinuous
growth factor-contained water phase pockets being the
coreandpolymermatrixformingtheshell.Theevolution
and formation of core–shell structure could be explained
bythe‘evaporationandstretchinginducedde-emulsiﬁca-
tion’ mechanism which was proposed by Xu et al [14].
During emulsion electrospinning, the spherical emulsion
droplets were ﬁrst stretched into elliptical shape in the
ﬁber direction. The elliptical droplets could break up into
smaller water droplets due to Rayleigh/capillary instabil-
ity, depending on viscosity difference and interfacial
tension, etc. Due to faster evaporation of solvent than
water, the viscosity of polymer solution increased more
rapidly than that of water droplets. The viscosity gradient
from the surface to the center resulted in the inward
movement of emulsiondroplets. Thus,thecoalescenceof
water droplets towards the central region occurred along
with the solidiﬁcation of shell layer, resulting in a core–
shell structure for ﬁbers. Interestingly, the core–shell
structureintheaforementionedtwotypesofﬁberslooked
different. A distinctive phase boundary between the core
and the shell was delineated in NGF/PDLLA ﬁber.
However, ambiguous phase boundary could only be
observed in GDNF/PLGA ﬁber. This phenomenon
might be attributed to different hydrophilicity/hydro-
phobicity of polymer matrix. It was well known that
PDLLA was more hydrophobic than PLGA, leading to
more apparent phase-separation during de-emulsiﬁca-
tion. The features of core–shell structure including core
to shell ratio and core continuity could be inﬂuenced by a
variety of process parameters and would signiﬁcantly
affectthereleaseproﬁleofincorporatedbiomolecules.
Concentration of polymer solution was one of the
key electrospinning parameters and utilized herein to
control the diameter of as-spun ﬁbers. Higher con-
centration of polymer solution would result in thicker
ﬁber diameter due to difﬁculty in jet stretching during
electrospinning caused by higher viscosity. Mono-
component ﬁbers with distinctive average ﬁber
Figure 10. Weight loss of mono- and bicomponent scaffolds during 42 day degradation tests: (a) G1 group, (b) G2 group.
12
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

diameter were obtained by using different polymer
concentration for both PLGA and PDLLA. Bicompo-
nent scaffolds with varying component ratios were
constructed using these monocomponent ﬁbers. The
average ﬁber diameter of bicomponent scaffolds could
be assumed as a weighted average of each component.
The result in ﬁgure 3 showed that the average ﬁber
diameter decreased approximately proportionally
with the increase of GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/
PDLLA ﬁber component ratio, which correlated well
with the assumption. The feasibility of utilizing
bicomponent strategy to produce multifunctional
electrospun scaffolds has been demonstrated by quite
a few studies. Wang et al fabricated multifunctional
Figure 11. SEM images of scaffold samples collected after 2, 4 and 6 weeks of degradation.
13
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

electrospun scaffolds using PLGA and PDLLA for
bone tissue engineering [22]. Bicomponent scaffolds
with controlled and tunable mass ratios of rhBMP-2/
PDLLA ﬁbers to Ca–P/PLGA ﬁbers were achieved by
employing DSDP-ES and multiple syringe strategy.
Bonani et al also used similar strategy and constructed
gradient micropatterns of electrospun ﬁbers through
programming the deposition of poly (ε-caprolactone)
(PCL) and PLGA ﬁbers and achieved spatiotemporal
release of biomolecules incorporated [27]. Their
results indicated that the produced scaffolds had a clo-
sely matching composition as designed and spatio-
temporal release of biomolecules was obtained
accordingly. Based on these studies and also work in
this project, it may be concluded that designed com-
position of bicomponent scaffolds was effectively
achieved by employing DSDP-ES. The component
ratio and average ﬁber diameter of bicomponent scaf-
folds herein could be controlled through DSDP-ES.
The monocomponent GDNF/PLGA scaffolds had
much lower WCA than monocomponent NGF/
PDLLA scaffolds, which could be attributed to less
hydrophobicity of PLGA polymer and involvement of
surfactants. The glycolic acid group of PLGA and
amphiphilic surfactants partially exposed on surface of
ﬁbers could improve the spread and ingression of
water and hence improved the wettability of scaffolds.
The wettability of bicomponent scaffolds was affected
by the NGF/PDLLA ﬁber content. The results showed
that PDLLA ﬁbers played a dominant role in wett-
ability of bicomponent scaffolds as all of them had
similar wettability to the monocomponent PDLLA
electrospun scaffolds. The similar phenomenon was
observed by other research group [28]. They fabricated
electrospun hybrid scaffolds composed of PCL ﬁbers
and gelatin ﬁbers and found that the wettability of
hybrid scaffolds was affected by PCL content due to
the high hydrophobicity of PCL. The produced hybrid
scaffolds had similar wettability to electrospun PCL
mats. The wettability of electrospun scaffolds is a com-
plicated issue and hard to deﬁne to some extent due to
their surface roughness and void space occupied by
air. However, it plays an important role in cell-scaffold
interaction including cell adhesion and proliferation.
There is no general consent about the optimum wett-
ability as speciﬁc wettability might be favored by dif-
ferent cell types. The wettability of scaffolds might
even play diverse roles in cell response. Hakamada et al
fabricated electrospun scaffolds using biodegradable
polymer poly (γ-benzyl-L-glutamate) and modiﬁed
their wettability through alkali-treatment [29]. They
found that an increase in wettability of scaffolds
decreased adhesion of endothelial cells but increased
cell spreading.
It was found that the UTS, EM and EB increased
with the increase of GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to NGF/
PDLLA ﬁber component ratio in the bicomponent
scaffolds. The result revealed that PLGA was tougher
and more ductile than PDLLA, which was consistent
with existing knowledge. It was believed that ﬂexibility
of glycolic acid chain segment in polymer backbone
inﬂuenced the crystallinity and improved the mechan-
ical properties of PLGA ﬁbers, while the rigidity of lac-
tic acid chain segment and racemization in PDLLA
polymer backbone compromised their mechanical
properties. Fiber diameter also played an important
role in mechanical properties of ﬁbrous scaffolds.
Thinner ﬁber diameter resulted in lower UTS, EM and
less EB as shown in ﬁgure 5. These results demon-
strated that the bicomponent strategy combining with
control of ﬁber diameter was an effective way to pro-
duce ﬁbrous scaffolds with tunable mechanical prop-
erties. Moreover, the UTS and EM were similar with or
of the same order of magnitude from those of natural
soft tissues as well as those of organs consisted of soft
connective tissues, suggesting that produced ﬁbrous
scaffolds were promising for soft tissue regeneration.
4.2. Encapsulation of GFs and their in vitro release
Combination of transient and prolonged delivery of
GFs is normally desirable for short- and long-term
peripheral nerve regeneration [30, 31]. Electrospin-
ning has been employed as a versatile technique to
fabricate delivery vehicles for various drugs and
biomolecules [32, 33]. Concerns about potential
denaturation of subtle biomolecules such as proteins
and growth factors due to hydrophobic interaction
with organic solvent in conventional electrospinning
have advanced the development of coaxial electrospin-
ning and emulsion electrospinning. Electrospinning
of water-in-oil emulsions is particularly advantageous
for the delivery of hydrophilic drugs and proteins over
other techniques. For example, delivery of hydrophilic
drugs and proteins by microspheres fabricated by
double emulsion methods often renders relatively low
EE. During emulsion electrospinning, hydrophilic
proteins are preserved in water phase core and
their bioactivity could be retained to a large extent.
The EE of NGF and GDNF in electrospun ﬁbrous
scaffolds reached to an average of 86.6±1.0% and
80.7±1.6%, respectively.
In this investigation, by incorporating GFs into
polymers with different degradation rates and tuning
component ratios in bicomponent scaffolds through
DSDP-ES, dual and controlled release of NGF and
GDNF was achieved. Following an initial burst release
in the ﬁrst 24 h, sustained release of NGF and/or
GDNF from corresponding ﬁbers was found during
the release period. The initial burst release was attrib-
uted to the growth factor-contained minute reservoirs
formed on or close to the surface of ﬁbers during
emulsion electrospinning. As discussed in the evol-
ution of core–shell structure, the majority of stretched
water droplets moved inward coalesced in the central
region and formed the water-phase core. However, a
minority of water droplets were detained while the
outer layer solidiﬁed due to rapid evaporation of
14
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

organic solvent. These tiny water droplets dwelling on
or near the surface of ﬁbers served as reservoir of
growth factors and rendered initial burst release
through diffusion when the scaffolds were immersed
in testing liquid. After the initial burst release, sus-
tained release was obtained which was attributed to
either diffusion of growth factor from interior of ﬁbers
to immersion liquid through the polymer matrix of
ﬁbers or a combination of diffusion and polymer
matrix degradation.
Comparing the release proﬁles including cumula-
tive release amount and cumulative release percentage
of growth factors, it could be seen that biomedical
polymers with different wettability and degradation
rates could be leveraged to tailor the release behavior
of incorporated growth factor. NGF and GDNF were
herein incorporated into PDLLA ﬁbers and PLGA
ﬁbers, respectively, to obtain different release proﬁle as
PLGA was less hydrophobic and had much faster
degradation rate than PDLLA. The release rate of
GDNF was therefore much faster than that of NGF.
Average diameter of electrospun ﬁbers in scaffolds was
also a useful control variable to manipulate the release
proﬁle of growth factors including the initial burst
release and subsequent sustained release. It was not
difﬁcult to speculate that disparate mechanisms might
dominate the release of respective growth factor over
different time periods. Both diffusion and matrix ero-
sion contributed to release kinetics of protein from
biodegradable polymer matrix such as PLGA and
PDLLA. With the consideration of surface erosion and
bulk erosion of biodegradable polymer matrix in dif-
ferent situations, polymer degradation would become
more complicated [34, 35]. Although there is no per-
fect model for modeling the release behavior of NGF
or GDNF for bicomponent scaffolds, the results in this
study did demonstrate that concurrent and sustained
release of NGF and GDNF with tunable amounts and
ratios could be achieved.
4.3. Bioactivity of incorporated GFs
There is concern about bioactivity loss of biomolecules
inelectrospun ﬁbers due totheir potential deactivation
and denaturation which might occur during solution
preparation, electrospinning at high voltage, freeze-
drying and sample sterilization [6, 36, 37]. Quite a few
reports demonstrated that protein released from
electrospun scaffolds could induce various cellular
responses, indicating that protein activity was at least
partially preserved during electrospinning [5, 38, 39].
Emulsion electrospinning and coaxial electrospinning
techniques could help preserve the bioactivity of
vulnerable biomolecules and provide delivery of these
biomolecules in a controlled manner [40–43]. In this
study, the bioactivity of GDNF and NGF released from
GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers, respec-
tively, were assessed on a culture-to-culture basis.
Both released growth factors induced much neurite
outgrowth and neural differentiation of PC12 cells
(ﬁgures 8 and 9), although much lower concentration
of NGF was used. The degree of neural differentiation
and neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells induced by
released GDNF and NGF both decreased as compared
to those induced by virgin GDNF and NGF, indicating
that there was partial bioactivity loss for both GDNF
and NGF released from GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers and
NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers, respectively. However, the degree
of neural differentiation induced by released GDNF
and NGF only decreased 9.7% and 10.1% as compared
with that induced by virgin GDNF and NGF, respec-
tively, at day 7. These results revealed that the
bioactivity of GDNF and NGF in GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers
and NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers, respectively, were both pre-
served to a very large extent, indicating that emulsion
electrospun ﬁbers were robust delivery vehicles for
hydrophilic proteins.
4.4. In vitro degradation of mono- and bicomponent
scaffolds
Polyesters such as PLGA and PDLLA have been widely
employed for controlled release vehicles owing to their
excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability. The
monomers generated during hydrolytic degradation
of PLGA and PDLLA are easily metabolized. In vitro
degradation of polymer-based scaffolds could be
inﬂuenced by a variety of factors, including polymer
properties, scaffold structure, immersed medium
environment, etc. In this investigation, these two types
of polymer with different degradation rates (1–2
months for PLGA, 12–14 months for PDLLA) were
employed to construct ﬁbrous scaffolds with the aim
of modulating the degradation behavior of scaffolds
and hence release behavior of incorporated GFs.
Electrospun scaffolds with various component ratios
were fabricated taking the advantage of DSDP-ES and
multiple syringe strategy as described before. Asshown
in ﬁgure 10, the weight loss of PDLLA monocompo-
nent scaffolds was small as compared to the rest of
tested scaffold samples. Weight loss of all scaffolds
containing PLGA component increased as the degra-
dation test proceeded, which also augmented with the
increase of component ratio of GDNF/PLGA ﬁber to
NGF/PDLLA in bicomponent scaffolds. The scaffolds
composed of ﬁbers with different diameters exhibited
similar degradation proﬁles except monocomponent
GDNF/PLGA scaffolds. Weight loss rates were nearly
constant within ﬁrst 2 weeks for GDNF/PLGA scaf-
folds in both G1 and G2 groups, although the weight
loss rate of G2 scaffolds was slightly higher than that of
G1 scaffolds. Within 2 to 4 weeks, an unconspicuous
increase of weight loss rate was noticed in G2 group. In
comparison, a sharp increase of weight loss rate was
observed in G1. The above results allowed one to
afﬁrm that ﬁbrous NGF/PDLLA scaffolds produced
by emulsion electrospinning did not degrade during
the 42 day experiment considering the much longer
15
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

degradation period of PDLLA. Hydrolytic degradation
of ﬁbrous scaffolds based on PLGA was conﬁrmed and
autocatalytic hydrolysis was believed to contribute in
light of the evidence of degradation acceleration.
Different mechanisms of degradation were thought to
dominate the degradation behavior of PLGA scaffolds
with different ﬁber diameters.
Morphology of ﬁbrous scaffolds collected at dif-
ferent times of immersion in PBS as shown in
ﬁgure 11, was studied to help further investigate the
degradation mechanism. Within ﬁrst 2 weeks, ﬁbers
became swollen and fused for both GDNF/PLGA and
NGF/PDLLA scaffolds. Due to its better hydro-
philicity, the swelling and fusion phenomenon was
more obvious in PLGA scaffolds than PDLLA scaf-
folds. Water took over the air void when samples were
impregnated in immersion medium. The morphology
of scaffolds in terms of pore closure and ﬁbrous net-
work evolved dynamically with the ﬁber swelling and
welding due to ﬁber relaxation and polymer chain
mobility. After 2 weeks, the ﬁbrous morphology of
PDLLA scaffolds barely changed. Even after 6 weeks,
the integrity of PDLLA ﬁbers remained intact,
although very small amount of nanopores were
observed on the surface of a few ﬁbers (G1 (0:1)). The
observation was completely different for PLGA
ﬁbrous scaffolds. After 2 weeks, abundant pore closure
and network collapse were observed with a gradual
disappearance of ﬁbrous morphology, which was
more obvious in scaffolds with thinner ﬁbers. After 6
weeks, the ﬁbrous morphology was completely lost,
generating ﬁber fragments and many micro- and
nanopores in the scaffold (G1 (1:0)). In sharp contrast,
a rough membrane was produced without any retrie-
vable ﬁber in scaffold G2 (1:0).
It is well known that more surface area and hence
more reaction sites will promote the hydrolysis of
PLGA which can also be auto-catalyzed by its car-
boxylic terminal degradation products. The enrich-
ment
of
acidic
degradation
products-oligomers
locating well within ﬁber matrix could exist, leading to
bulk erosion, as only soluble oligomers near the sur-
face are able to leach out. As discussed in the evolution
of core–shell structure in emulsion electrospun ﬁbers,
the water phase in emulsion electrospun ﬁbers tended
to coalesce inwards, leaving a shell layer of polymers.
The formed polymer shell could provide a barrier
for the oligomers to leach out. Thinner ﬁbers with less
solid polymer shell provided less resistance for the dif-
fusion of oligomers and experienced alleviated bulk
erosion. These might help explain the differences in
degradation proﬁles and morphology in G1 (1:0) and
G2 (1:0) scaffolds. More reaction sites due to more
surface area of G2 (1:0) scaffolds produced a faster
degradation rate as compared to G1 (1:0) scaffold in
the ﬁrst phase of degradation. The autocatalytic
hydrolysis during bulk erosion of G1 (1:0) scaffold
greatly accelerated its degradation rate in the second
phase of degradation. The degradation mechanisms
would signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the release proﬁle of
incorporated biomolecules.
5. Conclusions
Mono- and bicomponent electrospun ﬁbrous scaffolds
were fabricated through emulsion electrospinning and
DSDP-ES technique. The discontinuous core–shell
structureswere formed inboth NGF/PDLLA ﬁbers and
GDNF/PLGA ﬁbers, with growth factor-contained
water phase being the core. Both NGF and GDNF were
successfully incorporated with relatively high EE above
80%. Bicomponent scaffolds with different ﬁber comp-
onent ratios were constructed. The study demonstrated
that in vitro release of GFs and in vitro degradation of
scaffolds could be tuned by varying factors including
polymer matrix, ﬁber diameter and ﬁber component
ratio. The in vitro release and degradation mechanisms
were also thoroughly investigated, suggesting that
diverse degradation mechanisms might dominate the
degradation behaviors of different systems and conse-
quently inﬂuence the release behaviors of GFs incorpo-
rated. We believe the bicomponent scaffolds, capable of
providing sustained and tunable release of NGF and
GDNF and adjustable degradation proﬁle, will beneﬁt
the optimization of the synergetic effect between NGF
and GDNF and hold great promise in peripheral nerve
tissuerepair.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council through a GRF grant (HKU 718109E).
Assistance provided by M Wang’s group and techni-
cians in Department of Mechanical Engineering,
HKU, is acknowledged.
ORCID iDs
Chaoyu Liu
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-
8663-2129
References
[1] Bhardwaj N andKunduS C2010Electrospinning:afascinating
ﬁberfabricationtechnique Biotechnol. Adv.28325–47
[2] Cui W G, Zhou Y and Chang J 2010 Electrospun nanoﬁbrous
materials for tissue engineering and drug delivery Sci. Technol.
Adv. Mater. 11 014108
[3] Sill T J and von Recum H A 2008 Electrospinning: applications
in drug delivery and tissue engineering Biomaterials 29
1989–2006
[4] Li X, Su Y, Liu S, Tan L, Mo X and Ramakrishna S 2010
Encapsulation of proteins in poly(L-lactide-co-caprolactone)
ﬁbers by emulsion electrospinning Colloids Surf. B 75 418–24
[5] Zhang H, Jia X L, Han F X, Zhao J, Zhao Y H, Fan Y B and
Yuan X Y 2013 Dual-delivery of VEGF and PDGF by double-
layered electrospun scaffolds for blood vessel regeneration
Biomaterials 34 2202–12
16
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al

[6] Briggs T and Arinzeh T L 2014 Examining the formulation of
emulsion electrospinning for improving the release of
bioactive proteins from electrospun ﬁbers J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. A 102 674–84
[7] Xu X L, Zhuang X L, Chen X S, Wang X R, Yang L X and
Jing X B 2006 Preparation of core-sheath composite
nanoﬁbers by emulsion electrospinning Macromol. Rapid
Commun. 27 1637–42
[8] Prabhakaran M P, Venugopal J R and Ramakrishna S 2009
Mesenchymal stem cell differentiation to neuronal cells on
electrospun nanoﬁbrous substrates for nerve tissue
engineering Biomaterials 30 4996–5003
[9] Nichols C M, Brenner M J, Fox I K, Tung T H, Hunter D A,
Rickman S R and Mackinnon S E 2004 Effect of motor versus
sensory nerve grafts on peripheral nerve regeneration Exp.
Neurol. 190 347–55
[10] Bechara S L, Judson A and Popat K C 2010 Template
synthesized poly(epsilon-caprolactone) nanowire surfaces for
neural tissue engineering Biomaterials 31 3492–501
[11] Gu X S, Ding F, Yang Y M and Liu J 2011 Construction of tissue
engineered nerve grafts and their application in peripheral
nerve regeneration Prog. Neurobiol. 93 204–30
[12] Subramanian A, Krishnan U M and Sethuraman S 2012 Axially
aligned electrically conducting biodegradable nanoﬁbers for
neural regeneration J. Mater. Sci., Mater. Med. 23 1797–809
[13] Beachley V and Wen X J 2010 Polymer nanoﬁbrous structures:
fabrication, biofunctionalization, and cell interactions Prog.
Polym. Sci. 35 868–92
[14] Koh H S, Yong T, Chan C K and Ramakrishna S 2008
Enhancement of neurite outgrowth using nano-structured
scaffolds coupled with laminin Biomaterials 29 3574–82
[15] Fine E G, Decosterd I, Papaloizos M, Zurn A D and Aebischer P
2002 GDNF and NGF released by synthetic guidance channels
support sciatic nerve regeneration across a long gap Eur. J.
Neurosci. 15 589–601
[16] Airaksinen M S and Saarma M 2002 The GDNF family:
signalling, biological functions and therapeutic value Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 3 383–94
[17] Cao X and Shoichet M 2003 Investigating the synergistic effect
of combined neurotrophic factor concentration gradients to
guide axonal growth Neuroscience 122 381–9
[18] EricksonJ T,Brosenitsch TAandKatzDM2001Brain-derived
neurotrophicfactorandglialcell line-derivedneurotrophic
factor arerequiredsimultaneously forsurvivalofdopaminergic
primarysensoryneurons invivo J.Neurosci. 21581–9
[19] Price T J, Louria M D, Candelario-Soto D, Dussor G O,
Jeske N A, Patwardhan A M, Diogenes A, Trott A A,
Hargreaves K M and Flores C M 2005 Treatment of trigeminal
ganglion neurons in vitro with NGF, GDNF or BDNF: effects
on neuronal survival, neurochemical properties and TRPVI-
mediated neuropeptide secretion BMC Neurosci. 6
[20] Madduri S, Papaloïzos M and Gander B 2009 Synergistic effect
of GDNF and NGF on axonal branching and elongation
in vitro Neurosci. Res. 65 88–97
[21] Chung J H, Kubota H, Ozaki Y, Uda S and Kuroda S 2010
Timing-dependent actions of NGF required for cell
differentiation PLoS One 5 e9011
[22] Wang C and Wang M 2012 Dual-source dual-power
electrospinning and characteristics of multifunctional
scaffolds for bone tissue engineering J. Mater. Sci., Mater. Med.
23 2381–97
[23] Uebersax L, Mattotti M, Papaloizos M, Merkle H P,
Gander B and Meinel L 2007 Silk ﬁbroin matrices for the
controlled release of nerve growth factor (NGF) Biomaterials
28 4449–60
[24] Attiah D G, Kopher R A and Desai T A 2003 Characterization
of PC12 cell proliferation and differentiation-stimulated by
ECM adhesion protein and neurotrophic factors J. Mater. Sci.,
Mater. Med. 14 1005
[25] Pﬁster L A, Papaloizos M, Merkle H P and Gander B 2007
Nerve conduits and growth factor delivery in peripheral nerve
repair J. Peripher. Nervous Syst. 12 65–82
[26] Ruiter G C W, Malessy M J A, Yaszemski M J,
Windebank A J and Spinner R J 2009 Designing ideal conduits
for peripheral nerve repair Neurosurg. Focus 26 E5
[27] Bonani W, Motta A, Migliaresi C and Tan W 2012 Biomolecule
gradient in micropatterned nanoﬁbrous scaffold for
spatiotemporal release Langmuir 28 13675–87
[28] Chen Z J, Cao L H, Wang L Q, Zhu H Y and Jiang H L 2013
Effect of ﬁber structure on the properties of the electrospun
hybrid scaffolds composed of poly(e-caprolactone) and gelatin
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 127 4225–32
[29] Hakamada Y, Ohgushi N, Fujimura-Kondo N and Matsuda T
2012 Electrospun poly(gamma-Benzyl-L-Glutamate) and its
alkali-treated meshes: their water wettability and cell-adhesion
potential J. Biomater. Sci.—Polym. Ed. 23 1055–67
[30] de Boer R, Borntraeger A, Knight A M, Hebert-Blouin M N,
Spinner R J, Malessy M J A, Yaszemski M J and Windebank A J
2012 Short- and long-term peripheral nerve regeneration
using a poly-lactic-co-glycolic-acid scaffold containing nerve
growth factor and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
releasing microspheres J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 100A 2139–46
[31] Catrina S, Gander B and Madduri S 2013 Nerve conduit
scaffolds for discrete delivery of two neurotrophic factors Eur.
J. Pharmaceutics Biopharmaceutics 85 139–42
[32] Ji W, Sun Y, Yang F, van den Beucken J, Fan M W, Chen Z and
Jansen J A 2011 Bioactive electrospun scaffolds delivering GFs
and genes for tissue engineering applications Pharm. Res. 28
1259–72
[33] Song B T, Wu C T and Chang J 2012 Dual drug release from
electrospun poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)/mesoporous silica
nanoparticles composite mats with distinct release proﬁles
Acta Biomater. 8 1901–7
[34] Chen M L, Gao S, Dong M D, Song J, Yang C X, Howard K A,
Kjems J and Besenbacher F 2012 Chitosan/siRNA
nanoparticles encapsulated in PLGA nanoﬁbers for siRNA
delivery ACS Nano 6 4835–44
[35] Cui W G, Li X H, Zhou S B and Weng J 2008 Degradation
patterns and surface wettability of electrospun ﬁbrous mats
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 93 731–8
[36] Volpato F Z, Almodovar J, Erickson K, Popat K C,
Migliaresi C and Kipper M J 2012 Preservation of FGF-2
bioactivity using heparin-based nanoparticles, and their
delivery from electrospun chitosan ﬁbers Acta Biomater. 8
1551–9
[37] Sun B, Long Y Z, Zhang H D, Li M M, Duvail J L, Jiang X Y and
Yin H L 2014 Advances in three-dimensional nanoﬁbrous
macrostructures via electrospinning Prog. Polym. Sci. 39
862–90
[38] Montero R B, Vial X, Nguyen D T, Farhand S, Reardon M,
Pham S M, Tsechpenakis G and Andreopoulos F M 2012
bFGF-containing electrospun gelatin scaffolds with controlled
nano-architectural features for directed angiogenesis Acta
Biomater. 8 1778–91
[39] Jenkins P M, Laughter M R, Lee D J, Lee Y M, Freed C R and
Park D 2015 A nerve guidance conduit with topographical and
biochemical cues: potential application using human neural
stem cells Nanoscale Res. Lett. 10 1–7
[40] Llorens E, Ibañez H, del Valle L J and Puiggalí J 2015
Biocompatibility and drug release behavior of scaffolds
prepared by coaxial electrospinning of poly(butylene
succinate) and polyethylene glycol Mater. Sci. Eng. C 49 472–84
[41] Puhl S, Ilko D, Li L H, Holzgrabe U, Meinel L and
Germershaus O 2014 Protein release from electrospun
nonwovens: improving the release characteristics through
rational combination of polyester blend matrices with
polidocanol Int. J. Pharmaceutics 477 273–81
[42] Wang X Y, Yuan Y H, Huang X C and Yue T L 2015 Controlled
release of protein from core–shell nanoﬁbers prepared by
emulsion electrospinning based on green chemical J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 132 41811
[43] Yau W W Y, Long H Y, Gauthier N C, Chan J K Y and Chew S Y
2015 The effects of nanoﬁber diameter and orientation on
siRNA uptake and gene silencing Biomaterials 37 94–106
17
Biomed. Mater. 13 (2018) 044107
C Liu et al