Skip to main content
[image]
Browse
Search
Preparation and characterization of PLGA particles for subcutaneous
controlled drug release by membrane emulsification
CiteDownload (284.71 kB)ShareEmbed
journal contribution
posted on 2008-06-04, 10:12 authored by G. Gasparini, S.R. Kosvintsev,
Michael T. Stillwell, Richard Holdich
Uniformly sized microparticles of poly(DL, lactic-co-glycolic) (PLGA)
acid, with controllable median diameters within the size range 40 to
140 microns, were successfully prepared by membrane emulsification of
an oil phase injected into an aqueous phase, followed by solvent
removal. Initially, simple particles were produced as an oil-in-water
emulsion, where dichloromethane (DCM) and PLGA were the oil phase
and water with stabiliser was the continuous phase. The oil was injected
into the aqueous phase through an array type microporous membrane,
which has very regular pores equally spaced apart, and two different
pore sizes were used: 20 and 40 microns in diameter. Shear was
provided at the membrane surface, causing the drops to detach, by a
simple paddle stirrer rotating above the membrane. Further tests
involved the production of a primary water-in-oil emulsion, using a
mechanical homogeniser, which was then subsequently injected into a
water phase through the microporous membrane to form a water-in-oil-
in-water emulsion. These tests used a water soluble model drug (blue
dextran) and encapsulation efficiencies of up to 100% were obtained for
concentrations of 15% PLGA dissolved in the DCM and injected through
a 40 micron membrane. Solidification of the PLGA particles followed by
removal of the DCM through the surrounding aqueous continuous phase.
Different PLGA concentrations, particle size and osmotic pressures were
considered in order to find their effect on encapsulation efficiency.
Osmotic pressure was varied by changing the salt concentration in the
external aqueous phase whilst maintaining a constant internal aqueous
phase salt concentration. Osmotic pressure was found to be a significant
factor on the resulting particle structure, for the tests conducted at lower
PLGA concentrations (10 and 5% PLGA). The PLGA concentration and
particle size distribution influence the time to complete the

solidification stage and a slow solidification, formed by stirring gently
overnight, provided the most monosized particles and highest
encapsulation efficiency.
History
School
•  Aeronautical, Automotive, Chemical and Materials Engineering
Department
•  Chemical Engineering
Citation
GASPARINI, G. ... et al, 2008. Preparation and characterization of PLGA
particles for subcutaneous controlled drug release by membrane
emulsification. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 61 (2), pp. 199–
207.
Publisher
© Elsevier
Publication date
2008
Notes
This is a journal article. It was published in the journal, Colloids and
Surfaces B: Biointerfaces [© Elsevier] and the definitive version is
available at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09277765
DOI
•  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2007.08.011
ISSN
0927-7765
Language
•  en
Administrator link
•  https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/account/articles/9242042
Usage metrics
0
0
0
[image]
Categories
•  Chemical engineering not elsewhere classified
Keywords
PLGAMembrane emulsificationMicroparticleOsmotic pressureEncapsulation ef

Licence
[image]CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
Exports
Select an option
RefWorks
BibTeX
Ref. manager
Endnote
DataCite
NLM
DC
About
Solutions
Tools
Blog
Ambassadors
Contact
Privacy Policy
Cookie Settings
T&Cs
Accessibility Statement
Disclaimer
Sitemap
figshare. credit for all your research.