Drug Delivery
ISSN: 1071-7544 (Print) 1521-0464 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/idrd20
Development of a novel morphological paclitaxel-
loaded PLGA microspheres for eﬀective cancer
therapy: in vitro and in vivo evaluations
Zongrui Zhang, Xinyu Wang, Binbin Li, Yuanjing Hou, Jing Yang & Li Yi
To cite this article: Zongrui Zhang, Xinyu Wang, Binbin Li, Yuanjing Hou, Jing Yang & Li Yi
(2018) Development of a novel morphological paclitaxel-loaded PLGA microspheres for
eﬀective cancer therapy: in vitro and in vivo evaluations, Drug Delivery, 25:1, 166-177, DOI:
10.1080/10717544.2017.1422296
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10717544.2017.1422296
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
View supplementary material
Published online: 04 Jan 2018.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 3968
View related articles
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 13 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=idrd20

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Development of a novel morphological paclitaxel-loaded PLGA microspheres for
effective cancer therapy: in vitro and in vivo evaluations
Zongrui Zhanga,b, Xinyu Wanga,b, Binbin Lia,b, Yuanjing Houa,b, Jing Yangc and Li Yid
aState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China;
bBiomedical Materials and Engineering Research Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China; cSchool of
Foreign Languages, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China; dInstitute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P.R. China
ABSTRACT
Sustained release of therapeutic agents into tumor cells is a potential approach to improve therapeutic
efficacy, decrease side effects, and the drug administration frequency. Herein, we used the modified
double-emulsion solvent evaporation (DSE) method to prepare a novel morphological paclitaxel (PTX)
loaded poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) microspheres (MS). The prepared rough PTX-PLGA-MS pos-
sessed microporous surface and highly porous internal structures, which significantly influenced the
drug entrapment and release behaviors. The rough MS with an average particle size of 53.47 ± 2.87 lm
achieved high drug loading (15.63%) and encapsulation efficiency (92.82%), and provided a favorable
sustained drug release. The in vitro antitumor tests of flow cytometry and fluoroimmunoassay revealed
that the rough PTX-PLGA-MS displayed effective anti-gliomas activity and enhanced the cellular PTX
uptake through adsorptive endocytosis. Both in vitro and in vivo antitumor results demonstrated that
the sustained-release PTX could induce the microtubules assembly and the over-expression of Bax and
Cyclin B1 proteins, resulting in the microtubule dynamics disruption, G2/M phase arrest, and cell apop-
tosis accordingly. Furthermore, as the rough PTX-PLGA-MS could disperse and adhere throughout the
tumor sites and cause extensive tumor cell apoptosis with one therapeutic course (12 days), they could
reduce the system toxicity and drug administration frequency, thus achieving significant tumor inhibi-
tory effects with rapid sustained drug release. In conclusion, our results verified that the rough
PTX-PLGA-MS drug release system could serve as a promising treatment to malignant glioma.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 7 October 2017
Revised 18 December 2017
Accepted 25 December 2017
KEYWORDS
Paclitaxel; morphological
features; sustained release;
antitumor efficacy; cancer
therapy
Introduction
Glioma is the most aggressive and frequent common intra-
cranial malignant tumor, comprising approximately 50% of
all intracranial tumors and causing cancer-related death
worldwide (Yang & Wang, 2016; Wang et al., 2017). Glioma
developed from multipotent cancer stem cells has the ten-
dency of over-proliferation and possesses the capacity to pro-
liferate into heterogeneous lineages of cancer cells under
specific stimuli (Xie et al., 2014). Currently, the common
approaches for treating glioma patients are surgical resection
(Pessina et al., 2016), localization irradiation (Navarria et al.,
2016), and targeted chemotherapy (Murai et al., 2016).
However, the successful treatments are still remarkably lim-
ited by the conventional chemotherapy resistance and the
frequency of drug use (Guo et al., 2011; Floyd et al., 2016).
Therefore, the development of novel strategies to achieve
effective chemotherapy becomes essential in the treatment
of malignant glioma.
Paclitaxel (PTX) as a new class of microtubule stabilizing
agent,
has
shown
significant
antitumor
efficacy
against
various tumors, including refractory ovarian, breast, lung, and
other cancer types (Hou et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2017). PTX
functions through the promotion of microtubules assembly
and stabilization, thereby inhibiting mitosis and inducing cell
apoptosis (Naraharisetti et al., 2007). However, its successful
clinical cancer therapy is compromised by its poor aqueous
solubility, drug resistance in tumor cells, and nonspecific
pharmacokinetics in systemic circulation (Duan et al., 2017).
Furthermore, the effective anti-gliomas efficacy of PTX is lim-
ited by its poor permeability across the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) and the inability to maintain a higher drug concentra-
tion at the tumor sites (Zhan et al., 2010).
In an attempt to achieve high BBB penetration and glioma
targeting abilities, researchers have developed the nanopar-
ticles drug delivery system (DDS) with functional surface
groups (Nikanjam et al., 2007). However, the complexity of
these drug delivery strategies is increased, the high drug-
loading
content
and
targeted
drug
release
cannot
be
achieved simultaneously. Interestingly, upon brain tumor
treatments, different research groups have achieved superior
CONTACT Xinyu Wang
wangxinyu@whut.edu.cn
State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University
of Technology, Luoshi Road 122, Wuhan 430070, China
These authors contributed equally to this manuscript.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here.
 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DRUG DELIVERY
2018, VOL. 25, NO. 1, 166–177
https://doi.org/10.1080/10717544.2017.1422296

antitumor efficacy by implanting drug-loaded MS directly
into the precise and functional brain areas using stereotaxy
(Jollivet, 2004; Menei et al., 2004). Since these studies, the
development of polymeric PTX delivery implants with high
drug-loading efficiency and sustained drug release is import-
ant existing in choosing suitable delivery vehicle (Joshi et al.,
2016). Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) with excellent bio-
compatibility and adjustable degradation periods could be
ideal as delivery vehicle and the highly hydrophobic PTX
could be readily incorporated into hydrophobic PLGA matri-
ces (Ho et al., 2008).
Nowadays, most publications focus on the drug-loading
capacity and release behaviors of drug-loaded microspheres
(MS) better than their morphology which is strongly corre-
lated to drug entrapment and release behaviors (Bile et al.,
2015; Obayemi et al., 2016). To research how the MS morph-
ology exerts effects, researchers have prepared porous drug-
loaded MS with hollow core-shell structure and smooth MS
with denser matrix structure (Bae et al., 2010). The smooth
MS with narrow hydrophobic space resulted in less PTX pack-
aging and the drug release hindered by the nonporous sur-
face leaded to drug resistance increase (Shiny et al., 2013).
While, by comparison, the hollow core-shell MS achieved
higher drug loading quantity because of enough hydropho-
bic space for PTX-loading (Wang et al., 2015). Additionally,
these highly porous MS displayed an initial burst and a much
faster drug release diffusing from the mesoporous MS matri-
ces, whereas the smooth MS showed slow drug release due
to the lower inner porosity and longer diffusion lengths (Bae
et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2010).
In most cases, the burst drug release was attributed to
the MS surface drugs dispersion or the porous drug diffusion.
The sustained drug delivery possessed the advantage of pro-
longing drug release time, protecting drugs from biological
activity loss, and reducing administration frequency accord-
ingly (Kokai et al., 2010; Feng et al., 2014). The fundamental
understanding of the drug release mechanisms is essential to
prepare
the
novel
morphological
rough
PTX-PLGA-MS,
because the drug release kinetics dominantly depend on the
morphology and drug distribution of MS (Yang et al., 2001).
As delivery carriers of PTX, their morphology has significant
influences on drug entrapment and release behaviors, which
further
affects
antitumor
activity
(Wang
et
al.,
2015).
Furthermore, the disruption of programed cell proliferation
signaling pathways may result in elevated cell death, so the
changes of molecule biology in glioma cells play important
roles in malignant glioma treatment (Mercurio et al., 2017).
In this study, the special rough PTX-PLGA-MS were pre-
pared by the modified double-emulsion solvent evaporation
(DSE) technique and their morphology, drug entrapment and
release behaviors were evaluated. These tests were carried
out to confirm whether the rough MS possessed a desired
morphological features, higher drug loading capacity, and
enhanced sustained drug release activity. Additionally, the
molecular mechanisms of rough MS against tumor cells
(Figure 1) including cellular uptake of PTX, drugs induced cell
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the rough PTX-PLGA-MS fabrication technique, tumor site injection and intracellular drug delivery pathway. Intracellular traf-
ficking includes enhanced PTX uptake through adsorptive endocytosis, sustained PTX release, and promoted microtubule assembly and stabilization. The dysregula-
tion of cell cycle progression includes arresting the G2/M cell phase and disturbing microtubules dynamic equilibrium.
DRUG DELIVERY
167

apoptosis, and microtubules assembly had been elucidated
using the flow cytometry, fluoroimmunoassay, and Western
blot analysis. The in vivo tumor inhibition ratios were eval-
uated by directly injecting PTX formulations to the mice
xenograft tumor sites and analyzing the volumes, weights,
histology, and molecule biology of the treated tumors. The
implications of these results above are thoroughly analyzed
for the development of implantable rough PTX-PLGA-MS for
optimal therapeutic efficacy inside solid tumors.
Materials and methods
Materials
PLGA
(lactide/glycolide ¼75/25,
molecular
weight(Mw)
¼ 24,483) were synthesized in our laboratory. Paclitaxel (98%
purity), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, 89% hydrolyzed, Mw ¼ 77,000),
ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), dichloromethane (DCM), deu-
terated chloroform (CDCl3), trimethylsilane (TMS), phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS), and sodium salicylate were purchased
from Huashun Biological Technology Co., Ltd (Wuhan, China).
Trypsin, penicillin, streptomycin, Dulbecco’s minimal essential
medium (DMEM), Cell Counting Kit (CCK-8), paraformalde-
hyde,
Triton
X-100,
annexin
V/fluorescein
isothiocyanate
(FITC),
propidium
iodide
(PI),
4,-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI), and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes were
all bought from Sigma, St. Louis, MO. Primary antibodies
against
glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
(GAPDH), Bax, Bcl-2, Cyclin B1, and Cyclin D1 were purchased
from Beyotime Biotechnology, Jiangsu, China. Horseradish
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-mouse and anti-rabbit
IgG secondary antibodies were also obtained from Sigma.
Human glioma (U251) and hepatoma (HepG2) cells were
grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal
bovine serum and antibiotic supplements (penicillin and
streptomycin at both 100 units/mL), and was incubated in a
humidified atmosphere (37 C, 5% CO2). Female BALB/c-nu
mice (14–16 g) were obtained from the Animal Center of
Wuhan University. The mice were housed at 50% relative
humidity (25 C) for 12 h light/dark cycle and had free access
to standard chow food. All animal experiments were per-
formed in compliance with the guidelines set by the national
regulations and approved by the ethical committee for ani-
mal care of the medical sector.
Methods
Preparation of PTX-loaded PLGA microspheres
The rough PTX-PLGA-MS were prepared using double emul-
sion method (Figure 1) based on solvent evaporation as pre-
viously described with modification (Fang et al., 2014). Firstly,
10 mg of ABC were dissolved in 2 mL deionized water (DI) to
prepare the internal water phase (W1). PTX (20 mg) and
PLGA (200 mg) were initially dissolved in 6 mL DCM (oil
phase, O). Then, the W1/O homogeneous emulsion was
formed by ultrasonic dispersing in an ice-water bath for 60 s.
After probe sonicating, the resultant emulsion was trans-
ferred into 100 mL 2 wt% PVA solution (external water phase,
W2) under magnetic stirring and was continuously stirred at
800 rpm to remove the solvent. The solidified MS were centri-
fuged (2000 rpm) and washed four times with DI to remove
PVA and non-incorporated drugs. Afterwards, the washed MS
were lyophilized and stored in a vacuum desiccator at 20 C
for further analysis. The smooth PTX-PLGA-MS were prepared
by the O/W2 emulsion method with PVA concentration at
0.5 wt%. Additionally, the blank PLGA-MS were prepared by
the same parameters without addition of PTX drugs.
1H NMR and morphology analysis. 1H NMR spectra were
recorded on a Bruker AVANCE 500MHZ (AV 500, Germany)
spectrometer at 400 MHz (25 C), taking CDCl3 as eluent and
TMS as internal reference. For morphological studies, MS
were sprinkled on a double-sided adhesive tape previously
applied to an aluminum stub and then fixed onto a graphite
surface. The samples were coated with a 30 nm layer of gold
and visualized under scanning electron microscope(SEM;
Zeiss Ultra Plus, Germany) at 25 kV. Synchrotron radiation X-
ray microtomography scans (SR-lCT, Shanghai Synchrotron
Radiation Facility (SSRF), BL13W1) were conducted to investi-
gate the internal and microstructure of these MS. The MS
were blended in a micropipette container and scanned with
SR-lCT at 15 keV. Pixel size was 3.25 lm, sample-to-detector
distance was 12 cm, and exposure time was 5 s. The total
projected images were reconstructed using X-TRACT SSRF
CWS  64. Moreover, the three dimension (3 D) rendered data
were analyzed with VGStudio Max (Version 2.1, Volume
Graphics GmbH, Germany) and Image Pro Analyzer 3 D
(Version 7.0, Media Cybernetics, Rockville, MD).
Particle size, drug-loading capacity, and in vitro release
experiments
The mean diameter and polydispersity index of drug-loaded
MS were measured using a Malvern Instrument (Mastersizer
3000, England) based on laser light scattering. Particle sizes
and size distributions were determined by examining a
homogeneous MS ultra-purified water suspension and were
confirmed by measuring the MS diameters on their SEM
micrographs using ImageJ software. Their drug loading (DL)
and encapsulate efficiency (EE) were analyzed using an ultra-
violet spectrometer (UV-2550, SHIMADZU, Japan). Firstly, the
calibration curve of PTX was determined by detecting a
range of standard PTX concentrations (0–100 lg/mL). The
high correlation coefficient (R2 ¼ 0.99958) fitted by Origin
software confirmed the satisfied standard curve. Then, 10 mg
MS were dissolved in 5 mL DCM with stirring overnight to
ensure thorough dissolution. 10 mL methanol was added into
the above solution, and the mixture was vortexed for 1 min
before being measured by UV detection. The actual DL and
EE were calculated using Equations (1) and (2):
DL ð%Þ ¼ ðWeight of drugs in MSÞ = ðWeight of MSÞ  100%
(1)
EE ð%Þ ¼ Actual DLð%Þ = Theoretical DLð%Þ  100%
(2)
For release experiments, 15 mg PTX-loaded MS were sus-
pended in 5 mL sodium salicylate/PBS (pH 7.4) medium
(1 mol/L) in a dialysis membrane (Mw ¼ 14,000 Da). For free
PTX
release
behavior,
2 mg
PTX
were
suspended
in
168
Z. ZHANG ET AL.

the medium. The dialysis bags were separately immersed
into a screw-capped tube with 50 mL of the aforementioned
solution, which then was placed horizontally in an orbital
shaker (HZQ-F160, Harbin, China). At predetermined time
intervals, 2 mL of the solutions in the tube was collected for
UV absorbance analysis at 227 nm. Thereafter, the tubes were
replenished with 2 mL fresh medium and placed back inside
the shaker. The drug release amount was estimated through
monitoring the
absorbance
using
the above
calibration
Equations (1) and (2). Additionally, morphological examina-
tions of these MS after drugs release for 3, 7, and 14 days
were undertaken using SEM.
In vitro cytotoxicity and antitumor activity
The delivery vehicle cytotoxicity was evaluated by seeding U-
251 human glioblastoma cells in 96-well plates (3  103 cells/
well) in 200 lL DMEM. For antitumor tests, the cell density
was set as 5  103 cells/well, and 20 lL fresh PBS was
employed as control group. After 24 h incubation, PTX formu-
lations with equivalent PTX concentrations (0.01–100 lg/mL
in 20 lL PBS) were added to each well. After 48 h treatment,
the 96-well plates were replenished with 200 lL DMEM and
10 lL CCK-8 solution, and then incubated in a 5% CO2 atmos-
phere (37 C) for another 2 h. The solution absorbency was
measured on an ELISA (Multiskan, Thermo Fisher, Finland)
micro-plate reader at 450 nm. Cell viability was calculated
using Equation (3):
Cell viability ð%Þ ¼ ðAsample  APBSÞ = ðAPBS  AcellÞ  100%
(3)
Where Asample, APBS, and Acell represent the absorbencies
of the sample, the PBS medium and the cells, respectively.
According to the results, the values of the drug concentra-
tion at inhibition of 50% cell growth (IC50) were calculated
using SPSS(Chicago, IL, version 17.0).
Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis
The cell cycle and apoptosis induced by the treatments of
free PTX and rough PTX-PLGA-MS were evaluated by fluores-
cence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis (BD, Biosciences,
Franklin Lakes, NJ). Briefly, U251 cells (100  104 cells/mL)
were seeded in a culture flask (25 cm2) and was treated with
samples for 48 h. Thereafter, cells were harvested by trypsin
digestion, washed twice with cold PBS (4 C), centrifuged
(1500 rpm) for 5 min, and fixed in ethanol solution (70% v/v,
4 C) for at least 24 h. The fixed cells were collected and
resuspended in 500 lL PBS containing Triton-X 100 (0.3%
v/v), annexin V-FITC (200 mg/L), and PI (15 mg/L). After incu-
bation in the dark at 37 C for 30 min, cell apoptosis and cell
cycle phase changes was analyzed using the FACS equipped
with the Cell Quest software.
Fluoroimmunoassay
For the immunofluorescence assay, free PTX, and rough PTX-
PLGA-MS with PTX concentration of 5 lg/mL were incubated
in six-well plates which were previous seeded with U251 cells
(5  104 cells/well). After 24, 48, and 72 h of incubation, cells
were fixed in paraformaldehyde (4% v/v, 30 min), permeabi-
lized with Triton-X 100 (0.3% v/v, 10 min), and blocked in
normal goat serum (5% v/v, 30 min). Primary incubation was
conducted with a collagen primary antibody (in 3% BSA,
1:500, a-tubulin mouse antihuman) at 4 C overnight, fol-
lowed by 90 min secondary antibody incubation (in 3% BSA,
1:500, a-tubulin-FITC goat antimouse, 37 C lucifuge). Cell
nuclei were stained with DAPI (10 lg/mL) for 10 min away
from light. The images of stained cells were observed with a
fluorescence microscope (IX71, OLYMPUS, Tokyo, Japan) and
the NIS-Elements software.
Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis on U251 cells were subjected to differ-
ent treatments: control group, free PTX, and rough and
smooth PTX-PLGA-MS. After 24 and 48 h treatment, the pro-
tein lysates were harvested by grinding the treated cells in
ice-cold PBS solution. The homogenate were dissolved in
radio immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer and centri-
fuged (12,000 rpm) for 10 min (4 C). Protein concentration
was quantitated by the BCA protein assay kit and equal
amounts (30 lg) of cellular proteins were separated by 10%
(v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophor-
esis (SDS-PAGE). The GAPDH antibody was served as the
internal loading control. Proteins were transferred to a PVDF
membrane, which then was blocked with 5% (v/v) nonfat dry
milk in tris-buffered saline and Tween 20 (TBST) for 4 h
(37 C) and incubated with a specific primary antibody over-
night (4 C). The blots were washed thrice in TBST buffer and
incubated with an appropriate HRP-labeled secondary anti-
body for 2 h (4 C). Specific protein detections were achieved
using the BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate) / NBT
(nitro
blue
tetrazolium)
Alkaline
Phosphatase
Color
Development Kit according to the manufacturer instructions.
The intensity bands of proteins were quantified by the
Quantity One software.
In vivo antitumor activity
To determine whether the rough PTX-PLGA-MS obtained
improved in vivo therapeutic efficacy, the tumor xenograft
models were created by subcutaneously inoculating freshly
harvested HepG2(human liver carcinoma) cells in the right
flank region of BALB/c-nu mice (3  106 cells/mice) to allow
for easy and reproducible tumor volume measurements.
Tumor volumes were measured by calipers and calculated as
V ¼ d2  D/2 (d and D represent the shortest and the longest
tumor diameter, respectively). When tumor volumes reached
a mean size of approximately 260 mm3, the mice were ran-
domly divided into five groups and were administered via
intratumoral injection. As the cumulative PTX release amount
of rough MS was 85% for 12 days, the rough and smooth MS
were injected every 12 days, while the free PTX was injected
every four days. In order to compare the free PTX and drug-
loaded MS, different injections but the same whole dose
should be chosen. The free PTX treatment dosage was set as
10 mg/kg and the dosage of drug-loaded MS were chosen at
30 mg PTX equiv./kg accordingly. Additionally, the control
DRUG DELIVERY
169

groups of saline and empty PLGA-MS were administered
every four days. After treatments, the tumor volumes and
body weights of all tumor-bearing mice were recorded every
four days. At the end of the experiment, the excised tumors
were photographed and weighted. The tumor growth rate
was calculated as tumor growth volumes/days (mm3/day).
For tumor histology, the collected cryosection tumor tissues
(10 lm in thickness) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(HE)
and
examined
under
a
fluorescence
microscope
equipped with green filter.
In vivo molecular biology studies
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
was used for the assessment of mRNA expression of the
aforementioned apoptosis and cell cycle genes. Total RNA of
the treated tumor tissue was extracted using the RNeasy Kit
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The reverse transcription reaction
(RTR)
was
performed
using
Superscript
III
(Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) in a final volume of 20 mL containing 5 mg of
the total RNA. After 50 min incubation (37 C), the RTR was
terminated by heating at 72 C for 15 min. The newly synthe-
sized cDNA was amplified using the PCR synthesis kit
(Invitrogen) and the PCR fragments were visualized by eth-
idium bromide staining. Changes in the threshold method
were used to calculate the relative mRNA expression and the
results were normalized to the endogenous control GAPDH
for gene expression analysis. The primer sequences are dis-
played in Supplementary Table S1. Protein expression levels
of different treatments on liver tumors were evaluated by
Western blot. Firstly, tumor tissues after treatment were
homogenized, dissolved in RIPA buffer, and centrifuged (12,
000 rpm) for 10 min (4 C). The following test steps were
according to the in vitro Western blot method.
Statistical analysis
All numerical data were given as the mean ± standard devi-
ation. At least three replicates were set up in each group and
two independent experiments were performed. The results
were statistically analyzed using one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) through SPSS. p values less than .05 were consid-
ered statistically significant.
Results
PTX-PLGA-MS preparation and characterization
In this study, a novel morphological rough PTX-PLGA-MS
were prepared using the modified DSE method. Generally,
the double emulsion is an unstable system and the solvent
diffusion evaporation from W1/O emulsion to W2 aqueous
phase has significant impacts on the surface and inner
morphology of MS (Fang et al., 2014). The 1H NMR spectra
(Supplementary Figure S1) were obtained to identify their
characteristic functional groups. The signals observed at 1.59,
4.85, and 5.18 ppm are referred to protons of methyl, methy-
lene, and methyne groups of PLGA polymers correspond-
ingly. Meanwhile, signals arising from methyl (1.27 ppm),
acetyl (1.71–2.41 ppm), and aromatic (7.38–8.16 ppm) protons
are observed in the spectrum of free PTX. Importantly, all the
signals of polymer and drugs are visible in drug-loaded MS
spectrum. These observations indicated that PTX was suc-
cessfully encapsulated into PLGA-MS. Figure 2(A) showed
that the smooth PTX-PLGA-MS were spherical in shape with
internal sporadic porosity. While, the rough MS (Figure 2(B))
exhibited microporous surface and porous internal structures.
The
PTX
substances
observed
in
the fractured
internal
morphology of rough MS (Figure 2(C)) also confirmed the
successful drug entrapment. Furthermore, the 3 D cross-sec-
tion images indicated that the rough MS were porous
internal matrices with big holes (Figure 2(D)). The rough PTX-
PLGA-MS prepared with a higher external PVA concentration
showed a homogeneous internal porous structure and micro-
pores surface with deep surface folds compared to that of
smooth MS.
Particle size, drug-loading capacity, and in vitro
release analysis
An ideal drug carrier should have a narrow size distribution,
high DL, and EE (Jeffery et al., 1993). In this study, as the
Figure 2. The surface and internal SEM micrographs of (A) smooth PTX-PLGA-MS and (B) rough PTX-PLGA-MS; (C) The fractured internal morphology of rough PTX-
PLGA-MS. The arrows represent the PTX drug substances; and (D): The 3 D outer and inner morphometric of rough PTX-PLGA-MS.
170
Z. ZHANG ET AL.

process parameters (the aqueous phase volume, agitation
speed, PLGA Mw, composition, and concentration) were the
same, the main difference was the use of high external PVA
concentration in rough MS preparation. As a result, the rough
MS achieved smaller particle sizes (approximately 50 lm) and
narrower
size
distributions
than
that
of
smooth
MS
(Supplementary Table S2). Generally, the uniformly distrib-
uted MS particle sizes had slight effects on the DL and EE of
MS. Moreover, the novel morphological rough PTX-PLGA-MS
achieved higher drug-loading efficiency (15.63%) and encap-
sulation efficiency (92.82%) than the smooth MS (D.L ¼ 10.
85% and E.E ¼ 85.01%). According to the morphology ana-
lysis results, unlike smooth MS with internal sporadic poros-
ity, the rough MS with highly porous internal structure could
provide enough hydrophobic space for PTX packaging.
The release of free PTX (Figure 3(A)) was observed at an
zero-order release phase and the drug release amount was
about 85% at 48 h. Whereas, the rough PTX-PLGA-MS exhib-
ited S-curve release patterns and the cumulative PTX release
amount was approximately 11 and 85% at 48 h and 12 days,
respectively. The smooth MS release patterns were found to
be approximately linear with correlation coefficients from
0.962 to 0.965. Additionally, the release rate of smooth MS
was slower than that of rough MS, which might be attributed
to the slow matrices degradation rate and internal sporadic
porosity of smooth MS. The SEM micrographs of drug
released
smooth
MS
after
seven
days
incubation
(Supplementary Figure S2) showed that the MS are still intact
without hollow bores and the hollow bores were not found
until released for 14 and 21 days, thus confirming their slow
matrices
degradation
rate.
Noteworthy,
the
rough
MS
showed a fast drug release for seven days and leveled off at
day 14. After being released for seven days, the rough MS
particle
sizes
increased
and
the
spherical
MS
became
deformed with considerable mesopores (Figure 3(C,D)). The
rough MS appeared increasingly porous and aggregated with
longer immersion times. The results above indicated that the
rough MS with deep surface folds achieved a faster drug
release rate than the smooth MS.
In vitro antitumor activity
The cytotoxicity results showed that the polymer displayed
negligible cytotoxicity and the cells incubated with empty
Figure 3. (A) In vitro cumulative released curves of free PTX, smooth, and rough PTX-PLGA-MS. SEM micrographs of rough PTX-PLGA-MS after incubation in the
release medium for (B) three, (C) seven, and (D) 14 days. The stars mark the PTX crystals on the mesopores of MS.
DRUG DELIVERY
171

PLGA-MS even at the highest concentration exhibited normal
growth state (Supplementary Figure S3). Whereas, the PTX
formulations displayed cytotoxic potency to the proliferation
of U251 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly,
when U251 cells were incubated with smooth and rough
PTX-PLGA-MS at equivalent PTX concentrations, the cell via-
bility of smooth MS were lower than that of rough MS group.
The smooth MS treated group showed a high IC50 at 9.73 ± 0.
42 lg/mL, indicating their lower potent antitumor activity.
While the rough MS treated group exhibited a lower IC50 (4.
15 ± 0.38 lg/mL) than free PTX group (5.60 ± 0.35 lg/mL),
which suggested that the rough MS with sustained drug
release achieved enhanced antitumor effects rather than a
sharp inhibition caused by free PTX.
Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis
The U251 cells apoptosis and cycle changes after incubation
with PTX formulations for 48 h were evaluated using flow
cytometry assay. As shown in Figure 4(A,B), the cell apoptosis
percentage treated by the highest concentration of free PTX
and rough PTX-PLGA-MS were 24.47 ± 1.07 and 22.03 ± 1.16%,
respectively. Interestingly, with a lower PTX concentration,
the rough MS caused higher cell apoptosis than free PTX
(Figure 4(C)), suggesting their effective drug delivery on pro-
moting cell apoptosis. Supplementary Table S3 showed that
the percentage of cells in the G2/M phase treated by PTX
drugs significantly increased and a small portion of cells
were arrested in the S phase. Importantly, a low-dose rough
MS displayed a large proportion of cells arrested in the G2/M
phase. The further increase in PTX concentration resulted in
a great decrease in the viable number of cells, only a few
viable cells were in the G0/G1 phase.
Fluoroimmunoassay and Western blot analysis
The immunofluorescence assay were conducted to examine
the intracellular drug accumulation and subsequent drug dis-
tribution in U251 cells. The blue and green channel repre-
sented
the
DAPI-stained
nuclei
and
the
drug
induced
microtubules
expression
in
the
cytoplasm,
respectively
(Supplementary Figure S4). The cells induced by free PTX and
rough PTX-PLGA-MS exhibited typical apoptotic features,
such as bright staining, nuclei fragmenting, and chromatin
condensing nuclei (Lin et al., 2013). Furthermore, the rough
MS treated group showed a prolongation of microtubules
expression for the sustained drug release. In order to
research how the multifunctional proteins contribute to the
tumor inhibition in glioma, the immunoblotting were per-
formed. The cells in free PTX and rough MS treated groups
showed a higher expression of Bax and Cyclin B1, and a
lower expression of Bcl-2 (Supplementary Figure S5) than
that of control group. In smooth MS group, all the protein
expressions displayed a negligible variation, whereas the Bax
and Cyclin B1 expressions in rough MS group apparently
increased (Supplementary Figure S5 (C,D)). Additionally, the
proteins expression levels were displayed in a time-depend-
ent manner except for the Cyclin D1 protein levels.
In vivo antitumor efficacy
The treatment dosage was calculated as free PTX dosage at
10 mg/kg, which was between the mean arterial blood pres-
sure and maximum tolerated dose (Zhong et al., 2016).
Figure 5(A) displayed the tumor volume changes for saline
and empty PLGA-MS treated mice, which indicated they both
had no therapeutic effect. However, the tumor volumes of
PTX formulations groups slightly increased, and the rough
MS group (602.65 ± 193.75 mm3) showed the smallest final
Figure 4. Apoptosis analysis of U251 cells induced by (A) free PTX and (B) rough PTX-PLGA-MS with different concentrations of PTX (25, 5, 1, and 0.2 lg/mL,
respectively) for 48 h using flow cytometry. (C) The bar graphs show the percentage of cell apoptosis with different treatments. , # vs. control group, ,
,#p < .05, and , ##p < .02.
172
Z. ZHANG ET AL.

tumor volume. Noteworthy, mice treated with free PTX
exhibited noticeable body weight loss and hypersensitivity
symptoms (Figure 5(B)). While, the body weight of MS-
treated groups slightly increased and became stable at
around 18.1 g. The photographs (Figure 5(C,D)) of excised
and mice-bearing liver tumors showed a direct intuitive proof
of the remarkable tumor inhibition effect of rough MS.
Additionally, the final tumor weight for rough MS group was
smaller than that of free PTX and smooth MS groups (Figure
5(E)). Tumor inhibition efficiency was calculated based on the
tumor weight and volume measurements, the rough PTX-
PLGA-MS inhibited tumor growth efficiently (59.27%), which
was 1.35- and 1.55-fold higher than that of free PTX and
smooth MS, respectively. The HE staining images (Figure 5(F))
showed that the tumors treated by PTX preparations were
composed of poorly cohesive heterogeneous cells, which
were mostly polyhedral in shape, and had a large nucleus/
cytoplasm index. However, the control groups exhibited
noticeably higher tumor cell density, negligible necrosis, and
sporadic cell apoptosis.
In vivo molecular biology studies
Subsequent
to
the
tumor
growth
inhibition
analysis,
the molecular biology studies were performed to evaluate
the gene expressions of cell cycle and pro-apoptotic mol-
ecule pathways influenced by PTX drugs. Figure 6(A,B)
showed that the PTX formulations groups exhibited higher
Bax and Cyclin B1 gene expressions than control group.
Additionally, the mRNA expressions level in rough PTX-PLGA-
MS group was higher than that of smooth MS group. In line
with the RT-PCR results, treatment of tumor tissues with PTX
drugs have similar effects on Bax and Cyclin B1 proteins
expression. These groups exhibited no obvious transcription
changes of Bcl-2 and Cyclin D1 expression both at the mRNA
and protein levels. Noteworthy, compare to free PTX group,
the rough MS group exhibited higher Bax and Cyclin B1 pro-
teins expression (Figure 6(D)). These results were accordant
with the in vitro cell cycle and Western blot results, which
indicated that the PTX-mediated mitotic arrest or cell cycle
distributions were significantly affected by the activation of
these proteins.
Discussion
The favorable sustained drug release and high drug accumu-
lation in tumor cells are the critical factors of DDS for achiev-
ing
a
superior
antitumor
efficiency.
The
current
study
developed rough PTX-PLGA-MS with microporous surface
and internal porous structures to achieve these advantages.
Figure 5. In vivo antitumor efficacies of saline, free PTX, empty PLGA-MS, rough, and smooth PTX-PLGA-MS in tumor-bearing nude mice (n ¼ 7). (A) Tumor growth
curves during the entire experiment. (B) Body weight variations of mice. Photographs of (C) excised tumors and (D) tumor-bearing nude mice at the end of the
treatment procedure. (E) Weights of excised tumor at the end of the tests. (F) The histological characteristics of liver tumor tissue after treatments. # vs. control
group, , # p < .05; , ##p < .02; and p < .01.
DRUG DELIVERY
173

The 1H NMR spectra analysis demonstrated the successful
drug encapsulation. The characteristic PTX peaks in drug-
loaded MS were less prominent than that of free PTX, which
might be because the PTX is trapped in porous internal core
and isolated by PLGA matrices shell. The two key factors
existing in the formation mechanism of the novel morph-
ology are the use of ABC solution and higher external PVA
concentration. As the high PVA concentration may stabilize
the interfacial inherent thermodynamics between the two
immiscible (W1/O and W2) phases, the spontaneous coales-
cence of the multi-core globules can be avoided by the colli-
sion between these two metastable emulsion droplets (Fang
et al., 2014). Additionally, within a number of small W1/O
droplets, the ABC solution tends to produce carbon dioxide,
which is able to pass through the membranes between inner
holes, thus producing internal porous morphology through-
out the PLGA matrices. As the gases may further escape from
the MS surface, leaving pores on the surface, the small W1/O
droplets were encapsulated in the high viscosity PVA globule
which may slow down the carbon dioxide diffusion rate, thus
the prepared rough MS were endowed with deep surface
folds. The microporous surface was attributed to the diffusion
of DCM from the organic to the external PVA phases, which
caused precipitation of the dissolved PTX at PLGA matrices
during particle solidification. Unlike porous MS with hollow
sphere pores (Kokai et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2015), these
micropores were not interconnecting holes and might hinder
the access and diffusion of release medium into MS, thus
achieving low burst release. The specific aim of this work was
to evaluate whether the unique morphology have significant
influences on the PTX-loading quantity and in vitro PTX
release behaviors.
Generally, the obtained MS particle size is mainly depend-
ent on the size and stability of emulsion droplets formed
during the stirring process. The small emulsion coagulation
easily induced by specific rotational speed and shear forces
became stable once formed and caused the MS to have a
narrower size distribution. When setting the same stirring
speed, a decrease in MS size can be achieved by increasing
the external PVA concentration. The presence of high exter-
nal PVA concentration could break up the emulsion into
smaller droplets and stabilize emulsion droplets against
coalescence by providing a hydrophilic environment during
emulsification and solidification, resulting in smaller particle
sizes
and
uniformed
drug
distribution
within
MS.
Additionally, the hydrophobic PLGA matrices possessed a
readily incorporation of hydrophobic PTX drugs. The rough
PTX-PLGA-MS achieved higher DL and EE than the prepared
smooth MS and other PTX-loaded MS prepared by former
researchers (Du et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2016), because their
internal porous structure could provide enough hydrophobic
space for PTX-loading and the high PVA concentration could
Figure 6. Molecular biological analysis of liver tumors receiving different treatments. Relative (A) Bax/Bcl-2 and (B) Cyclin B1/Cyclin D1 mRNA expression changes
in liver tumors were analyzed by PCR. GAPDH was used as an internal reference. (C) Effects of saline, free PTX, empty PLGA-MS,) rough PTX-PLGA-MS, and smooth
PTX-PLGA-MS on proteins expression in liver tumors. (D) Quantitative evaluation on proteins expression were further analyzed by densitometry. # vs. saline group;
, #p < .05; , ##p < .02; and ###p < .01.
174
Z. ZHANG ET AL.

prevent the drugs from diffusing out. The sustained release
of drugs from a carrier system is an important property for
their biomedical application in cancer treatment. The rough
PTX-PLGA-MS showed a faster drug release rate than those
smooth MS, which might be because the rough MS with
deep surface folds achieved a higher matrices degradation
rate and the drug diffusion-migration from rough MS was
accelerated by the immersion of the release medium into the
matrices through the hollow bores. As the polymer matrices
degrade, the release rate became fast due to the hollow
bores diffusion of drugs from MS matrices. The effective drug
release could be facilitated by the accelerated drug release
rate, thus reducing the risk of drug resistance. Therefore, the
rough PTX-PLGA-MS possessed the enhancement of drug
activity, the relatively fast drug release, and the favorable
sustained drug release.
In vitro antitumor results showed that the smooth MS
showed higher antitumor efficacy only after 48 h incubation.
This phenomenon may stem from the fact that the initial
drug release for smooth MS was mainly attributed to the
release of drugs distributed on the MS surface. While for the
release of rough MS, the crystallized drug were released by
simple dissolution and diffusion. As we know, the terminal
half-life of PTX was about 5.8 h, so the obvious cell apoptosis
observed in free PTX and smooth MS treated groups was
indicative of the limitations of systemic drug administration
because they only provided short and acute drug exposure
to tumor cells. Noteworthy, the rough PTX-PLGA-MS showed
higher antitumor efficacy than free PTX and smooth MS with
prolongation of incubation, which suggested that the rough
MS possessed the efficient transport of sustained-release PTX
into tumor cells. As apoptosis deregulation is the hallmark of
all
cancer
cells,
the
induction
of
apoptosis
has
been
described as the standard, and best strategy in anticancer
therapy (Strasser et al., 2011). The apoptosis results were in
line with the in vitro antitumor activity, indicating that with
lower PTX concentration, the rough PTX-PLGA-MS induced
more early and late apoptosis. The growth inhibitory effect
was also caused by a specific perturbation of cell cycle-
related events. The cell cycle results suggested that the treat-
ment of PTX formulations could disrupt cell division process
and lead to cell apoptosis by arresting cells in the G2/M
phase. The increase in G2/M phase arrest was attributed to
the PTX caused microtubules assembly and stabilization, and
the mitotic spindle function interference. The fact that the
rough MS show continued inhibition to U251 cells rather
than a sharp inhibition caused by free PTX demonstrated
that they achieved the strengthened antitumor efficiency and
the lower cytotoxicity to normal cells.
The drug uptake and diffusion throughout the tumor cells
play a critical role in the antitumor effect of DDS. The green
fluorescence channel completely overlaid the blue channel,
indicating that the PTX drugs readily penetrated through the
cells lipid membranes into the nuclei, thus showing diffuse
cytoplasmic and nuclear fluorescence. This result suggested
that the rough MS possessed the remarkable capability of
drug uptake and transport into cancer cells through adsorp-
tive endocytosis. Furthermore, the antitumor efficacy of
rough MS could be facilitated by the expression of cell cycle
and apoptosis related proteins. The Bax and Bcl-2 protein
expression results coincided with the cell apoptosis data indi-
cated that the rough MS exhibited prolonged proteins
expression and inhibition effects. The Cyclin D1 expression
levels were consistent with the cell cycle results that a few
viable cells were in the G0/G1 phase. The high Cyclin B1
expression levels could induce increased chemosensitivity of
U251 cells to PTX and also a delicate balance existed
between nonspecific cell death and specific transfection effi-
ciency. This balance is due partly to the Cdk1/Cyclin B1 medi-
ated phosphorylation and inactivation of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
protein. Therefore, the activation of pro-apoptotic signaling
and the stabilization of microtubules are thought to be the
principal mechanisms for the cytotoxic action of PTX drugs in
inhibiting motility and invasion of U251 cells. The presented
strategy of rough PTX-PLGA-MS system could mediate cell
cycle proteins expression, thus receding the drug resistance
in tumor cells and increasing the efficiency of chemotherapy.
Most importantly, PTX formulations on tumor inhibition
were evaluated in liver tumor-bearing mice to see whether
they could enhance the in vivo antitumor efficacy and reduce
system toxicity. It is noteworthy that the rough PTX-PLGA-MS
group (13.45 mm3/day) showed higher tumor growth inhib-
ition potency than free PTX (21.92 mm3/day) and smooth MS
(25.46 mm3/day) groups. This was because the rough MS pos-
sessed higher drug-loading capacity and rapid sustained
drug release than the smooth MS. The noticeable body
weight loss in free PTX group was in good agreement with
prior reports (Ding et al., 2014; Yi et al., 2015), which was
attributed to the high drug level in the blood and the nonse-
lective drug uptake by normal tissues (Che et al., 2015).
While, the stable body weight in MS-treated groups sug-
gested their negligible side effects and were suitable for sys-
temic
chemotherapy.
The
necrosis
areas
(pyknosis,
karyorrhexis) in HE images exhibited an extensive lymphocyte
infiltration into the tumor tissue and a low presence of con-
nective tissue (Perez et al., 2015). The free PTX group showed
a negative antitumor effect because of the frequency of drug
use caused high plasma drug concentration in the body. The
smooth MS with lower drug-loading capacity and slower
drug release rate resulted in insufficient drug accumulation
in the tumor sites, thus achieving unsatisfactory antitumor
efficiency. As the rough PTX-PLGA-MS could evenly disperse
and adhere throughout the tumor sites, they caused the
most extensive cell apoptosis and necrosis with one thera-
peutic course (12 days), thus reducing drug distribution in
normal tissues, and achieving a significant inhibitory effect
with rapid sustained drug release.
The molecular biology analysis clearly confirmed the
improvement in antitumor efficiency of rough PTX-PLGA-MS.
The observed increase expression in pro-apoptosis levels
in vivo proved that the rough MS induced significant cell
apoptosis. Additionally, the decreased cell proliferation rate
observed in the Cyclin B1 overexpressing cells were consist-
ent with the in vitro Western blot results, suggesting that
Cyclin B1 protein level may affect cell cycle progression. The
involvement of these signaling events verified that the
expression of cell cycle and pro-apoptotic molecule pathways
is essential for the enhancement of PTX toxicity in tumor
DRUG DELIVERY
175

tissues. Unlike the smooth MS group with slow drug release
rate, the rapid sustained PTX release from rough MS enabled
the tumor cells to sequential exposure to PTX drugs. The sus-
tained accumulation of PTX drugs at the tumor sites will con-
tinuous kill the tumor cells by pro-expressing those cell cycle
and apoptosis mRNA and proteins. The rough MS with highly
chemotherapy sensitizing effect could increase drug accumu-
lation and uptake in both inherent and acquired liver tumor
cells. Based on these results, we concluded that the adsorp-
tive endocytosis mediated drug delivery of rough PTX-PLGA-
MS produced fewer drug resistance, thus achieving higher
antitumor effects and less damage to normal tissues.
Conclusion
To sum up, we developed the implantable rough PTX-PLGA-
MS with microporous surface and porous internal structure
to overcome recognized problems with PTX drug administra-
tion, such as the unfavorable drug release, undesirable drug
accumulation, and drug resistance to tumors. Due to the
unique morphology, the resultant rough MS achieved high
drug-loading capacity and rapid sustained drug release.
Moreover, the rough MS enhanced the cellular uptake and
intracellular delivery of PTX, and actively induced the expres-
sions of cell cycle and pro-apoptotic genes and proteins,
thereby inhibiting cell proliferation, as well as increasing cell
apoptosis. Importantly, the rough PTX-PLGA-MS not only
exhibited effectively in vitro antitumor activity, but also sig-
nificantly suppressed tumor growth, and improved animal
survival by decreasing the drug administration frequency and
side effects. Therefore, this rough PTX-PLGA-MS DDS repre-
sents a promising strategy to enhance the efficacy of malig-
nant glioma therapy.
Disclosure statement
The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors alone are respon-
sible for the content and writing of this article.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2017YFC1103800);
the
HongKong,
Macao
and
Taiwan
Science
&
Technology Cooperation Program of China (2015DFH30180); the Science
and Technology Support Program of Hubei Province (2015BCE022); and
the
Fundamental
Research
Funds
for
the
Central
Universities
(2017IVA095).
References
Bae SE, Choi DH, Han DH, et al. (2010). Effect of temporally controlled
release of dexamethasone on in vivo chondrogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stromal cells. J Control Release 143:23–30.
Bile J, Bolzinger MA, Vigne C, et al. (2015). The parameters influencing
the morphology of poly(E-caprolactone) microspheres and the result-
ing release of encapsulated drugs. Int J Pharm 494:152–66.
Che E, Gao Y, Wan L, et al. (2015). Paclitaxel/gelatin coated magnetic
mesoporous silica nanoparticles: preparation and antitumor efficacy in
vivo. Micropor Mesopor Mat 204:226–34.
Ding DW, Tang XL, Cao XL, et al. (2014). Novel self-assembly endows
human serum albumin nanoparticles with an enhanced antitumor effi-
cacy. AAPS Pharm Sci Tech 15:213–22.
Du L, Cheng JP, Chi Q, et al. (2006). Biodegradable PLGA microspheres
as a sustained release system for a new luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) antagonist. Chem Pharm Bull 54:1259–65.
Duan ZQ, Chen CT, Qin J, et al. (2017). Cell-penetrating peptide conju-
gates to enhance the antitumor effect of paclitaxel on drug-resistant
lung cancer. Drug Deliv 24:752–64.
Fang K, Yang F, Zhang QY, et al. (2014). Fabrication of nonporous and
porous cationic PLGA microspheres. Mater Lett 117:86–9.
Feng T, Tian H, Xu C, et al. (2014). Synergistic co-delivery of doxorubicin
and paclitaxel by porous PLGA microspheres for pulmonary inhalation
treatment. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 88:1086–93.
Floyd JA, Galperin A, Ratner BD. (2016). Drug encapsulated aerosolized
microspheres as a biodegradable, intelligent glioma therapy. J Biomed
Mater Res Part Res 104:544–52.
Guo J, Gao X, Su L, et al. (2011). Aptamer-functionalized PEG-PLGA nano-
particles
for
enhanced
anti-glioma
drug
delivery.
Biomaterials
32:8010–20.
Ho ML, Fu YC, Wang GJ, et al. (2008). Controlled release carrier of BSA
made by W/O/W emulsion method containing PLGA and hydroxyapa-
tite. J Control Release 128:142–8.
Hou J, Sun E, Zhang ZH, et al. (2017). Improved oral absorption and anti-
lung cancer activity of paclitaxel-loaded mixed micelles. Drug Deliv
24:261–9.
Jeffery H, Davis SS, O’Hagan DT. (1993). The preparation and character-
ization of poly(lactide-co-glycolide) microparticles. II. The entrapment
of a model protein using a (water-in-oil)-in-water emulsion solvent
evaporation technique. Pharm Res 10:362–8.
Jollivet C. (2004). Striatal implantation of GDNF releasing biodegradable
microspheres promotes recovery of motor function in a partial model
of Parkinson's disease. Biomaterials 25:933–42.
Joshi G, Kumar A, Sawant K. (2016). Bioavailability enhancement, Caco-2
cells uptake and intestinal transport of orally administered lopinavir-
loaded PLGA nanoparticles. Drug Deliv 23:3492–504.
Kokai LE, Tan H, Jhunjhunwala S, et al. (2010). Protein bioactivity and
polymer orientation is affected by stabilizer incorporation for double-
walled microspheres. J Control Release 141:168–76.
Lee J, Oh YJ, Lee SK, et al. (2010). Facile control of porous structures of
polymer microspheres using an osmotic agent for pulmonary delivery.
J Control Release 146:61–7.
Lin GJ, Jiang GB, Xie YY, et al. (2013). Cytotoxicity, apoptosis, cell cycle
arrest, reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial membrane potential,
and Western blotting analysis of ruthenium(II) complexes. J Biol Inorg
Chem 18:873–82.
Menei P, Jadaud E, Faisant N, et al. (2004). Stereotaxic implantation of 5-
fluorouracil-releasing
microspheres
in
malignant
glioma.
Cancer
100:405–10.
Mercurio L, Cecchetti S, Ricci A, et al. (2017). Phosphatidylcholine-specific
phospholipase C inhibition down-regulates CXCR4 expression and
interferes with proliferation, invasion and glycolysis in glioma cells.
PLoS One 12:1–19.
Murai S, Ichikawa T, Kurozumi K, et al. (2016). Quantitative analysis of
brain edema in patients with malignant glioma treated with BCNU
wafers. J Clin Neurosci 33:148–53.
Naraharisetti PK, Ong BYS, Xie JW, et al. (2007). In vivo performance
of implantable biodegradable preparations delivering paclitaxel and
etanidazole for the treatment of glioma. Biomaterials 28:886–94.
Navarria P, Pessina F, Cozzi L, et al. (2016). Can advanced new radiation
therapy technologies improve outcome of high grade glioma (HGG)
patients? Analysis of 3D-conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) versus volu-
metric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) in patients treated with surgery,
concomitant and adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy. BMC Cancer 16:362–71.
Nikanjam M, Gibbs AR, Hunt CA, et al. (2007). Synthetic nano-LDL with
paclitaxel oleate as a targeted drug delivery vehicle for glioblastoma
multiforme. J Control Release 124:163–71.
Obayemi JD, Danyuo Y, Dozie-Nwachukwu S, et al. (2016). PLGA-based
microparticles
loaded
with
bacterial-synthesized
prodigiosin
for
176
Z. ZHANG ET AL.

anticancer drug release: effects of particle size on drug release kinet-
ics and cell viability. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl 66:51–65.
Perez E, Martinez A, Teijon C, et. al. (2015). Blanco, Improved antitumor
effect of paclitaxel administered in vivo as pH and glutathione-sensi-
tive nanohydrogels. Int J Pharm 492:10–19.
Pessina F, Navarria P, Cozzi L, et al. (2016). Value of surgical resection in
patients with newly diagnosed Grade III glioma treated in a multi-
modal approach: surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Ann Surg
Oncol 23:3040–6.
Shiny J, Goverdhan P, Habibuddin M, et. al. (2013). Development and
evaluation of a novel biodegradable sustained release microsphere
formulation of paclitaxel intended to treat breast cancer. Int J Pharm
Investig 3:119–25.
Strasser A, Cory S, Adams JM. (2011). Deciphering the rules of pro-
grammed cell death to improve therapy of cancer and other diseases.
EMBO J 30:3667–83.
Wang L, Cai M, Liu Y, et al. (2015). Polymer hydrophobicity regulates
paclitaxel distribution in microspheres, release profile and cytotoxicity
in vitro. Powder Technol 275:77–84.
Wang R, Gu X, Zhou J, et al. (2016). Green design “bioinspired disassem-
bly-reassembly strategy” applied for improved tumor-targeted anti-
cancer drug delivery.” J Control Release 235:134–46.
Wang SY, Shi XD, Gan ZH, et al. (2015). Preparation of PLGA micro-
spheres
with
different porous
morphologies.
Chin
J
Polym
Sci
33:128–36.
Wang XZ, Zhang Q, Lv LY, et al. (2017). Glioma and microenvironment
dual targeted nanocarrier for improved antiglioblastoma efficacy.
Drug Deliv 24:1401–9.
Xie J, Ma YH, Wan M, et al. (2014). Expression of dedifferentiation
markers and multilineage markers in U251 glioblastoma cells with
silenced EGFR and FGFR genes. Oncol Lett 7:131–6.
Yang H, Wang Y. (2016). Five miRNAs considered as molecular targets for
predicting neuroglioma. Tumour Biol 37:1051–9.
Yang YY, Chung TS, Ng NP. (2001). Morphology, drug distribution, and in
vitro release profiles of biodegradable polymeric microspheres con-
taining protein fabricated by double-emulsion solvent extraction/
evaporation method. Biomaterials 22:231–41.
Yi X, Lian X, Dong L, et al.. (2015). Co-delivery of pirarubicin and paclitaxel
by human serum albumin nanoparticles to enhance antitumor effect and
reduce systemic toxicity in breast cancers. Mol Pharmaceutics 12:4085–98.
Yu YX, Xu S, You H, et al. (2017). In vivo synergistic anti-tumor effect of
paclitaxel nanoparticles combined with radiotherapy on human cer-
vical carcinoma. Drug Deliv 24:75–82.
Zhan C, Gu B, Xie C, et al. (2010). Cyclic RGD conjugated poly(ethylene
glycol)-co-poly(lactic acid) micelle enhances paclitaxel anti-glioblast-
oma effect. J Control Release 143:136–42.
Zhong Y, Goltsche K, Cheng L, et al. (2016). Hyaluronic acid-shelled acid-
activatable paclitaxel prodrug micelles effectively target and treat
CD44-overexpressing
human
breast
tumor
xenografts
in
vivo.
Biomaterials 84:250–61.
DRUG DELIVERY
177