Research Article
Synthesis and Characterization of PLGA Shell Microcapsules Containing
Aqueous Cores Prepared by Internal Phase Separation
Samer R. Abulateefeh1,2 and Alaaldin M. Alkilany1
Received 10 July 2015; accepted 9 September 2015; published online 28 September 2015
Abstract. The preparation of microcapsules consisting of poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) polymer
shell and aqueous core is a clear challenge and hence has been rarely addressed in literature. Herein,
aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules have been prepared by internal phase separation from acetone-
water in oil emulsion. The resulting microcapsules exhibited mean particle size of 1.1±0.39 μm (PDI=0.35)
with spherical surface morphology and internal poly-nuclear core morphology as indicated by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). The incorporation of water molecules into PLGA microcapsules was con-
firmed by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules and the
corresponding conventional PLGA microspheres were prepared and loaded with risedronate sodium as a
model drug. Interestingly, aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules illustrated 2.5-fold increase in drug
encapsulation in comparison to the classical PLGA microspheres (i.e., 31.6 vs. 12.7%), while exhibiting
sustained release behavior following diffusion-controlled Higuchi model. The reported method could be
extrapolated to encapsulate other water soluble drugs and hydrophilic macromolecules into PLGA
microcapsules, which should overcome various drawbacks correlated with conventional PLGA
microspheres in terms of drug loading and release.
KEY WORDS: internal phase separation; microcapsules; microspheres; poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide);
risedronate sodium.
INTRODUCTION
Poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) is a polyester ran-
dom copolymer consisting of two monomers: lactic acid and
glycolic acid. PLGA is a FDA-approved polymer for human
use owing to its biocompatibility and biodegradability (1).
Therefore, PLGA has been extensively used in biomedical
and drug delivery applications (2). Moreover, this polymer is
one of the most polymers used successfully in the preparation
of microparticles and nanoparticles.
According to the internal structure, PLGA microparticles
are classified into two types: microspheres and microcapsules
(Fig. 1) (3). Microspheres are monolithic particles character-
ized with an internal continuous matrix. On the other hand,
microcapsules are vesicular particles consist of a polymer shell
surrounding a single core (mono-nuclear) or multi-cores
(poly-nuclear) filled with oil or water. PLGA microspheres
and, to less extent, oily core microcapsules are the most com-
monly prepared types due to their ease of preparation (4).
Unfortunately, both of these types are mainly appropriate for
encapsulating hydrophobic drugs; however, they suffer from
low encapsulation efficiency of water-soluble drugs, peptides,
and proteins (5).
In fact, fabrication of aqueous core-PLGA shell micro-
capsules is a clear challenge. Therefore, very limited studies
have addressed this point in the literature (6,7). These studies
came mainly in an attempt to overcome drawbacks related to
the conventional w1/o/w2 double emulsion method (6–10).
They involved in situ formation of w1/o/w2 double emulsion
from a single o/w emulsion via spontaneous self-emulsification
by using either an appropriate emulsifier such as sodium
dioctyl sulfosuccinate (Aerosol OT or AOT) (6) or a copoly-
mer as poly(D,L-lactide)-b-poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl
methacylate)(PLA-b-PDMAEMA) (7).
Internal phase separation is another promising approach
proposed firstly by the Vincent group to prepare oil core-shell
microcapsules (4,11–13). This approach was then utilized to
prepare aqueous core microcapsules using three polymers:
poly(tetrahydorfuran), poly(methyl methacrylate), and
poly(isobutyl methacrylate) (9). This method involves one-
step formation of acetone-water in oil emulsion. The internal
phase contains the polymer-forming shell dissolved in a mix-
ture of a volatile good solvent (acetone) and a non-volatile bad
solvent (water). After emulsification in oil, gradual evapora-
tion of acetone leads to a decrease in polymer solubility and
hence polymer precipitation (coacervation) (11). At optimum
balance between the interfacial tensions of different phases
(14), polymer migrates to the interface forming a shell sur-
rounding aqueous compartment.
Herein, we employed this method, for the first time, to
prepare aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules. These
1 Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, Fac-
ulty of Pharmacy, The University of Jordan, Amman, 11942, Jordan.
2 To whom correspondence should be addressed. (e-mail:
s.abulateefeh@ju.edu.jo)
AAPS PharmSciTech, Vol. 17, No. 4, August 2016 (# 2015)
DOI: 10.1208/s12249-015-0413-y
891
1530-9932/16/0400-0891/0 # 2015 American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists

particles were loaded with risedronate sodium as a model
drug. Risedronate is a water-soluble bisphosphonate used in
the treatment of osteoporosis (15). Risedronate was used as a
model drug because water-soluble drugs are more challenging
for incorporation into and release from PLGA particles. As
the aim of this manuscript was to fabricate aqueous core-
PLGA shell microcapsules using an internal phase of (water/
acetone) mixture, the control experiments involved the prep-
aration of the corresponding PLGA microspheres by the same
internal phase without water (acetone only). The success of
this approach will be utilized for encapsulation of other water-
soluble drugs and hydrophilic macromolecules (i.e., peptides
and DNA) into PLGA microcapsules, and hence overcome
various drawbacks correlated with conventional PLGA micro-
spheres in terms of drug loading and release.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
All chemicals and solvents were used as received without
further purification: poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)
(50:50) MW ca. 7–17 kDa (Resomer® RG 502 H, Evonik
Industries, Germany), sorbitan monooleate (Span® 80,
Sigma, UK), liquid paraffin (mineral oil, Chemie, Germany),
risedronate sodium was a gift from Hikma Pharmaceuticals
(Amman, Jordan), acetone 99.5%, and n-hexane 95% (Rci
Labscan, Thailand).
Preparation of Aqueous Core-PLGA Shell Microcapsules
Aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules were prepared
by internal phase separation method adapted from the
Vincent group (9,11–13) with modifications. This method in-
volves preparation of two phases: internal acetone-water
phase and external oil phase. The former phase was prepared
by dissolving PLGA (9 or 30 mg) in acetone (3 ml) followed
by dropwise addition of water (0.25–0.5 ml). The oily phase
was prepared by dissolving Span® 80 as emulsifying agent in
mineral oil (12 ml, 2.5% w/w). The two phases were emulsified
at 30 W for 30 s using ultra-probe sonicator (UP200Ht,
Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany). The formed emul-
sion was left on stirrer until complete evaporation of acetone
leading to the formation of hazy suspension. To collect the
microcapsules, the resulting suspension was diluted with n-
hexane (12 ml) and centrifuged at 500 rpm for 5 min
(Centurion Scientific Ltd., Chichester, UK), the precipitated
microcapsules were rewashed with n-hexane further two times
and left in the fume hood overnight for complete drying. The
resulting microcapsules were collected as a dry powder.
Similarly, risedronate-loaded microcapsules were pre-
pared exactly as discussed previously but with dissolving a
specific amount of the drug (6.25 mg) in water before addition
to the acetone solution.
For comparison purposes, PLGA microspheres (i.e., with
no aqueous core) were prepared exactly as mentioned above
but without addition of water to the acetone phase.
Risedronate-loaded PLGA microspheres were formulated by
direct addition of the drug in the acetone phase.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Surface morphology of microcapsules was visualized using
scanning electron microscopy (SEM; FEI Company—Inspect
F50/FEG, the Netherlands). Prior to SEM imaging, dried mi-
crocapsules were mounted onto aluminum stubs using double-
sided adhesive carbon tape and then coated with gold particles
using sputter coater (Quorum Technology, Ashford, UK).
Particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), and histograms for
particle size distributions were obtained by statistical analysis
for a population of particles (n≥80 particles) from SEM micro-
graphs using ImageJ® software.
SEM was also used to examine the internal structure of
microspheres and microcapsules. To do so, dried particles
were frozen with liquid nitrogen and then fractured by a glass
rod before thawing (9,12,16). Fractured particles were pre-
pared for SEM imaging and evaluated as mentioned above.
Differential Scanning Calorimetry and Thermogravimetric
Analysis
Thermal analysis of PLGA polymers, PLGA micro-
spheres, and corresponding aqueous core-PLGA shell micro-
capsules (with initial amount of polymer=30 mg) were
conducted using DSC823e Mettler Toledo (Thermo Electron
Scientific Instruments Corp., Madison, WI, USA). These sam-
ples were placed in aluminum pans and heated at a rate of
10°C/min over temperature range between 25 and 250°C.
Similarly, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) for these
materials was performed using TGA/SDTA 851 Mettler
Toledo. These samples (12–19 mg) were placed under nitro-
gen with flow rate of 10 ml/min and heated at a rate of 10°C/
min over temperature range between 25 and 350°C.
Determination of Drug Loading and Encapsulation Efficiency
in Microparticles
Risedronate loading and encapsulation efficiency from
PLGA microparticles (with initial amount of polymer=
30 mg) were determined by a direct method. A specific
amount of dried risedronate-loaded microparticles (25–
30 mg) was dissolved in acetone (3 ml) to confirm liberation
of drug molecules from PLGA polymers and then left over-
night for complete evaporation. After that, these samples
were suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 6.8,
3 ml) and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 min (Centurion
Scientific Ltd., Chichester, UK). The supernatant containing
free drug was then collected and analyzed using UV-Vis spec-
trophotometer (SpectroScan 80D, Biotech Engineering
Fig. 1. A schematic presentation of internal morphology of a micro-
sphere, b microcapsule with poly-nuclear cores, and c microcapsule
with mono-nuclear core
892
Abulateefeh and Alkilany

Management Co. Ltd., Nicosia, UK) at the corresponding
λmax wavelength of 262 nm. The absorbance values were used
to determine the amount of risedronate using a calibration
curve of risedronate in PBS. Encapsulation efficiency quanti-
fication was done in triplicates. Drug encapsulation efficiency
and loading were calculated using the following equations (5):
Encapsulationefficiency% ¼ Massof drugloadedinmicroparticles
Initialmassof drugusedinformulation x100
ð1Þ
Drugloading% ¼ Massof drugloadedinmicroparticles
Massofmicroparticlesrecovered
x100
ð2Þ
In Vitro Drug Release Studies
In vitro release studies were conducted for risedronate-
loaded microspheres and corresponding microcapsules (with
initial amount of polymer=30 mg) in PBS media. A specific
amount of risedronate-loaded microparticles (25–30 mg) was
dispersed in PBS (pH 6.8, 3 ml) and placed in a dialysis tube
with a molecular weight cutoff 10–12 kDa. Dialysis bags were
immersed in a glass vial containing PBS (pH 6.8, 30 ml) and
placed in a shaker water bath (Heto Lab Equipment,
Bromma, Denmark) at 37°C and 75 rpm (12,13,17,18).
Released amounts of the drug were determined by collecting
dialysate samples (2 ml) at certain time intervals and replaced
immediately with the same volume of fresh PBS to main-
tain sink conditions. Collected samples were analyzed
using UV-Vis spectrophotometer (SpectroScan 80D, Biotech
Engineering Management Co. Ltd., Nicosia, UK) at the corre-
sponding λmax wavelength of 262 nm. Release experiments were
done in triplicates, and the average values were recorded with
the corresponding standard deviations.
Statistical Analysis
Data are given as mean±standard deviation (SD), n=3.
Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired t test for drug
loading and encapsulation efficiency, and two-way ANOVA
with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test for drug release
profiles using GraphPad Prism version 6.0 (San Diego, CA).
Results were considered significant when p<0.05.
RESULTS
SEM Characterization
Internal phase separation method was adapted from
Atkin et al. (9) with modifications to prepare aqueous core-
PLGA shell microcapsules as per cartoon in Fig. 1. For com-
parison purposes, water-free PLGA microspheres were also
prepared by the same method but without adding water to the
internal acetone phase. Both surface and internal morphology
of particles were characterized by SEM.
PLGA microparticles (with initial amount of polymer=
9 mg) were characterized by SEM to evaluate surface mor-
phology and size distribution as shown in Fig. 2. Furthermore,
particle size, polydispersity index (PDI) and histograms for
particle size distribution were obtained by statistical analysis
for a population of particles from SEM micrographs using
ImageJ® software as shown in Fig. 3. Aqueous core-
PLGA shell microcapsules exhibited discrete, spherical,
and fairly mono-disperse particles with mean particle size
of 1.1±0.39 μm (PDI=0.35) (Figs. 2a and 3a). On the
other hand, PLGA microspheres exhibited significantly
larger particles with mean particle size of 10.9±3.1
(PDI=0.29) (Figs. 2d and 3b). The significant particle size dif-
ferences between aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules and
PLGA microspheres could be attributed to the different com-
position of the internal phase in each case (acetone/water mix-
ture or acetone, respectively), which dictate the interfacial
tension between the internal and the external phases and ulti-
mately the mean droplet size of the resulting water-in-oil
emulsion.
The internal morphology of these particles was also re-
vealed by SEM images. For easier evaluation and clearer
visualization, larger particles (prepared with initial amount
of polymer=30 mg) were fractured after freezing in liquid
nitrogen (9). Aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules exhib-
ited internal poly-nuclear core morphology (Fig. 2b, c). As
evident from SEM analysis, a microcapsule with size of ca.
15 μm contains deep cores with size ranging between 1
and 3 μm per core. In addition, many smaller microcap-
sules exhibited deep central indentation (with a doughnut
shape) as shown in Fig. 2c, which would indicate the
presence of major empty compartments or holes inside
these particles.
In contrast, water-free microspheres exhibited internal
continuous monolithic matrices (Fig. 2e) with some spheres
having shallow small pores or protrusions (Fig. 2f). Such pro-
trusions are well-reported natural defects happen commonly
during solvent evaporation and polymer precipitation (19)
and so should be differentiated from the Btrue^ cores observed
in microcapsules.
DSC and TGA Analysis
Thermal analysis of PLGA polymers, aqueous core-
PLGA shell microcapsules, and the corresponding PLGA
microspheres were conducted by DSC as presented in
Fig. 4.
The DSC thermogram of PLGA polymer exhibits a sharp
endothermic band at 48°C (trait a). On the other hand, two
characteristic features were observed in the DSC thermogram
of the aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules (trait b);
namely (i) downward shift of the abovementioned endother-
mic band from 48 to 39°C and (ii) emergence of another
endothermic band centered at ca. 90°C. In contrast, only one
broad endothermic band centered at ca. 48°C is apparent in
the DSC thermogram of PLGA microspheres (trait c).
Detailed explanation of these thermograms is presented in
the Discussion section.
The above samples were also thermally analyzed by ther-
mogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. 5) in an attempt to mea-
sure moisture content. However, such measurement was not
possible due to similar traits observed for both PLGA micro-
spheres and corresponding aqueous-core PLGA microcap-
sules, probably due to low detection (sensitivity) and
quantification limit of the instrument.
893
Aqueous Core-PLGA Shell Microcapsules

Risedronate Loading and Release Studies
The loaded amount of risedronate drug was measured by a
direct method as described in the experimental section. As
shown in Fig. 6, PLGA microspheres exhibited drug loading of
3.1±0.9% and encapsulation efficiency of 12.7±4.7%. On the
other hand, aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules exhibited
significant increase (ca. two to threefolds) in drug loading (6.6±
1.2%) and encapsulation efficiency (i.e., 31.6±5.2%).
As shown in Fig. 7, in vitro release studies were conduct-
ed for risedronate-loaded microspheres and corresponding
microcapsules in PBS media (pH 6.8, 37°C). The amount
of released drug was measured at specific time points
and divided by the total loaded drug (i.e., cumulative
drug release %). Both types of PLGA particles (aqueous
core-PLGA shell microcapsules and PLGA microspheres)
exhibited similar release profiles. In the first 30 min,
PLGA microcapsules and microspheres exhibited burst
release of around 49.1 and 43.4% of their drug content,
respectively. However, both types of microparticles ex-
hibited extended release profiles within the remaining
6 h.
Fig. 2. SEM images of aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules (a–c) and PLGA microspheres (d–f). Specifically, the graphs display a a
population sample of aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules, b internal morphology of a fractured aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsule
with poly-nuclear core morphology, c indented aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules after fracturing, d a population of PLGA microspheres,
e internal morphology of a fractured PLGA microsphere with continuous monolithic matrix, and f internal morphology of a fractured PLGA
microsphere with defects and shallow pores
Fig. 3. Histograms for particles size distribution of a aqueous-core PLGA shell microcapsules and b
PLGA microspheres
894
Abulateefeh and Alkilany

DISCUSSION
The preparation of aqueous core-PLGA shell microcap-
sules is a clear challenge, albeit it would overcome many
drawbacks correlated with the conventional PLGA micro-
spheres in terms of drug loading and release, especially for
water-soluble drugs and hydrophilic macromolecules. In this
work, we employed internal phase separation approach (9,11)
with modifications to prepare aqueous core-PLGA shell mi-
crocapsules. PLGA polymers were dissolved in a mixture of
acetone (volatile good solvent) and water (non-volatile bad
solvent) and then emulsified into mineral oil external phase
containing Span® 80 as emulsifier. Upon acetone evaporation
from the internal phase droplets, the solubility of PLGA
polymers decreases gradually leading to phase separation
and migration to the interface surrounding water droplets.
In the internal acetone-water phase, the minimum vol-
ume (acetone to water) ratio required to dissolve (30 mg)
PLGA was 6:1. Interestingly, this ratio is significantly lower
than that used in previous studies required to prepare micro-
capsules using other polymers as poly(tetrahydorfuran) (12:1)
and poly(methyl methacrylate) (20:1) (9). Such differences in
acetone-to-water ratio would be attributed to the differences
of the intrinsic solubility of these polymers into acetone-water
mixture. In PLGA case, low acetone-to-water ratio indicates
the ability to incorporate larger amounts of water into
microcapsules with lower amounts of organic solvents
and, thus overcoming one of the major drawbacks corre-
lated with the internal phase separation method used in the
preparation of microcapsules composed of poly(tetrahydorfuran),
Fig. 4. The DSC thermograms of a PLGA polymers, b aqueous
core-PLGA shell microcapsules, and c PLGA microspheres
Fig. 5. The TGA thermograms of a PLGA polymers, b aqueous
core-PLGA shell microcapsules, and c PLGA microspheres
Fig. 6. Drug loading and encapsulation efficiency of risedronate into
aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules and PLGA microspheres.
Error bars represent the standard deviation of three measurements.
Data are given as mean±standard deviation (SD); n=3 for each
group; unpaired t test; *p<0.05 and **p<0.01
Fig. 7. % Cumulative release of risedronate from aqueous core-PLGA
shell microcapsules and PLGA microspheres in PBS (pH 6.8). Data are
given as mean±standard deviation (SD); n=3 for each time point in both
curves; ns represents no significant difference at p<0.05 using two-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test
895
Aqueous Core-PLGA Shell Microcapsules

poly(methyl methacrylate), and poly(isobutyl methacrylate)
polymers (10,20).
The incorporation of water molecules into aqueous core-
PLGA shell microcapsule were confirmed by SEM images
(Fig. 2) and DSC thermal analysis (Fig. 4).
In contrast to the internal continuous matrix of water-free
PLGA microspheres (Fig. 2d–f), SEM images revealed the
poly-nuclear nature of aqueous core microcapsules
(Fig. 2a–c). The formation of multi-cores (poly-nuclear)
rather than a single core (mono-nuclear) is probably at-
tributed to two reasons: (i) the rigid nature of PLGA polymers
(i.e., glass transition temperature (Tg) is around 48°C) would
slow down its migration to the periphery during acetone evap-
oration, leading to local precipitation around water droplets
entrapped into several cores. Similar findings were observed in
previous studies using polymers with comparable Tg values (i.e.,
poly(methyl methacrylate) and poly(isobutyl methacrylate)
polymers). (ii) The volume of acetone used here was just enough
to dissolve PLGA polymers in the presence of water molecules.
Hence, the evaporation of the first parts of acetone induces fast
local precipitation of PLGA polymers with no time to allow
polymer migration to the interface (9).
DSC thermal analysis was also utilized to confirm the in-
corporation of water into microcapsules (Fig. 4). The DSC
thermogram of PLGA polymer exhibits a typical sharp endo-
thermic band at 48°C indicative of the relaxation peak following
the glass transition temperature (Tg) of this polymer (trait a)
(21). Interestingly, the DSC thermogram of the corresponding
aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules exhibits downward
shift of this endothermic band to ca. 39°C as shown in trait b.
Such downward shift resulted mainly from the presence of water
molecules, which acts as a plasticizer leading to a decrease in the
Tg (21–23). Moreover, the incorporation of water molecules into
these microparticles was also confirmed by the emergence of
another endothermic band centered at ca. 90°C relevant to the
evaporation of water molecules (17,21,24,25). On the other
hand, this evaporation band is absent in the DSC thermogram
of PLGA microspheres with only one broad endothermic band
centered at ca. 48°C related to the Tg of the polymer (trait c). In
contrast to the sharp endothermic Tg-related bands observed in
the DSC thermograms of PLGA polymers and microcapsules,
the broadness of Tg band for microspheres is presumably attrib-
uted to the heterogeneous exposure of PLGA polymers to heat
(i.e., embedded into matrices or exposed at surface).
Both types of PLGA microparticles were loaded with
risedronate sodium model drug and compared in terms of drug
loading (Fig. 6) and release profiles (Fig. 7). Risedronate sodium
is a water-soluble drug, so it was chosen here as a model drug
because it is more challenging for drug incorporation and re-
lease into hydrophobic PLGA particles. In fact, PLGA particles
prepared by conventional methods such as emulsion evapora-
tion and interfacial deposition methods are more appropriate
for water-insoluble drugs but suffer from low encapsulation of
water-soluble drugs (5). Hence, the presented protocol shows an
alternative simple approach to prepare PLGA particles with
higher incorporation of water soluble drugs via core-shell
structure.
As shown in Fig. 6, the encapsulation efficiency of water-
soluble risedronate sodium was significantly higher in micro-
capsules as compared to that in microspheres (2.5-folds),
which is in agreement with the formation of internal aqueous
cores inside the hydrophobic PLGA matrix. The presence of
water in the internal phase enhances drug retention into mi-
crocapsules and reduces leaching of the drug out to the exter-
nal phase during preparation leading to higher incorporation.
In vitro drug release studies showed similar release profiles
for both microspheres and microcapsules (Fig. 7). Both types
exhibited burst release of around 49.1 and 43.4% of their drug
content, respectively. Burst release results from fast diffusion of
drug molecules either adsorbed at or entrapped near the surface
of particles (26,27). Future studies will be performed to reduce
burst drug release including increasing concentrations of PLGA
polymers, varying ratios between PLGA polymer to risedronate
drug, varying concentrations of emulsifier, and varying ratios
between water and oil. However, both types of microparticles
exhibited extended release profiles within the remaining 6 h.
Kinetics of drug release profiles were analyzed using the
Higuchi model (28,29) by employing Eq. 3:
Mt
M∞
¼ k
ﬃ
t
p
ð3Þ
where Mt and M∞refer to the cumulative amount of drug
release at time t and infinite time, respectively, and k is the
rate constant.
Drug release from both microspheres and microcapsules
were fitted into the Higuchi model, with R2 values of 0.99 and
0.97, respectively. Analysis of drug release profiles for both
types suggests Fickian diffusion-controlled release mechanism
(28–30). Such non-zero release kinetics (case I transport
mechanism) was expected for microspheres and microcapsules
with poly-nuclear core morphology. In the latter particles, the
rate of drug diffusion is probably limited by diffusion through
the matrix rather than that from aqueous reservoir. Therefore,
if zero-order release kinetics is desired, mono-nuclear micro-
capsules with single aqueous core and saturated drug content
should be considered (3), which is an ongoing research in our
laboratory. Furthermore, systematic optimization studies are
in process to investigate the effect of many other factors such
as polymer concentration and water to oil ratios.
CONCLUSION
Internal phase separation approach was employed suc-
cessfully to prepare aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules.
DSC and SEM analysis confirmed the presence of internal
aqueous poly-nuclear core. These microcapsules were spheri-
cal in shape and fairly mono-disperse in size with mean particle
size of 1.1±0.39 μm (PDI=0.35). In comparison to conven-
tional PLGA microspheres, aqueous core-PLGA shell micro-
capsules exhibited 2.5-fold increase in drug encapsulation
efficiency. Systematic optimization studies are in process to
prepare aqueous core-PLGA shell microcapsules with mono-
nuclear core morphology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Deanship of Academic Research
(DAR) at The University of Jordan for the financial support.
The authors also acknowledge the technical help of Miss
Fatema Abdullah and Miss Sundus Alfarasin.
896
Abulateefeh and Alkilany

REFERENCES
1. Makadia HK, Siegel SJ. Poly lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) as
biodegradable controlled drug delivery carrier. Polymers.
2011;3(3):1377–97.
2. Anderson JM, Shive MS. Biodegradation and biocompatibility of
PLA and PLGA microspheres. Adv Drug Deliv Rev.
2012;64(Supplement(0)):72–82.
3. Andersson Trojer M, Nordstierna L, Nordin M, Nyden M,
Holmberg K. Encapsulation of actives for sustained release.
Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2013;15(41):17727–41.
4.
Romero-Cano MS, Vincent B. Controlled release of 4-
nitroanisole from poly(lactic acid) nanoparticles. J Control
Release. 2002;82(1):127–35.
5. Govender T, Stolnik S, Garnett MC, Illum L, Davis SS. PLGA
nanoparticles prepared by nanoprecipitation: drug loading and
release studies of a water soluble drug. J Control Release.
1999;57(2):171–85.
6.
Yu X, Zhao Z, Nie W, Deng R, Liu S, Liang R, et al.
Biodegradable polymer microcapsules fabrication through a
template-free approach. Langmuir. 2011;27(16):10265–73.
7. Watanabe T, Kimura Y, Ono T. Monodisperse polylactide micro-
capsules with a single aqueous core prepared via spontaneous
emulsification and solvent diffusion. RSC Adv. 2014;4(10):4872–7.
8. Tewes F, Munnier E, Antoon B, Ngaboni Okassa L, Cohen-
Jonathan S, Marchais H, et al. Comparative study of
doxorubicin-loaded poly(lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles pre-
pared by single and double emulsion methods. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm. 2007;66(3):488–92.
9. Atkin R, Davies P, Hardy J, Vincent B. Preparation of aqueous
core/polymer shell microcapsules by internal phase separation.
Macromolecules. 2004;37(21):7979–85.
10. Park JM. Polymeric Hollow Particles for Encapsulation of
Chemical Molecules. Encapsulation Nanotechnologies: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2013. p. 291-345.
11. Loxley A, Vincent B. Preparation of poly(methylmethacrylate)
microcapsules with liquid cores. J Colloid Interface Sci.
1998;208(1):49–62.
12. Dowding PJ, Atkin R, Vincent B, Bouillot P. Oil core−polymer shell
microcapsules prepared by internal phase separation from emulsion
droplets. I. Characterization and release rates for microcapsules
with polystyrene shells. Langmuir. 2004;20(26):11374–9.
13. Dowding PJ, Atkin R, Vincent B, Bouillot P. Oil core/polymer
shell microcapsules by internal phase separation from emulsion
droplets. II: controlling the release profile of active molecules.
Langmuir. 2005;21(12):5278–84.
14. Torza S, Mason SG. Three-phase interactions in shear and elec-
trical fields. J Colloid Interface Sci. 1970;33(1):67–83.
15. Nasr M, Awad GAS, Mansour S, Al Shamy A, Mortada ND. A
reliable predictive factorial model for entrapment optimization of
a sodium bisphosphonate into biodegradable microspheres. J
Pharm Sci. 2011;100(2):612–21.
16. Jiang Y, Wang D, Zhao T. Preparation, characterization, and
prominent thermal stability of phase-change microcapsules with
phenolic resin shell and n-hexadecane core. J Appl Polym Sci.
2007;104(5):2799–806.
17. Abulateefeh SR, Taha MO. Enhanced drug encapsulation and
extended release profiles of calcium–alginate nanoparticles by using
tannic acid as a bridging cross-linking agent. J Microencapsul.
2015;32(1):96–105.
18. Gun WJ, Routh AF. Formation and characterization of pH-responsive
liquid core microcapsules. Langmuir. 2013;29(40):12541–8.
19. Mao S, Shi Y, Li L, Xu J, Schaper A, Kissel T. Effects of process
and formulation parameters on characteristics and internal mor-
phology of poly(d, l-lactide-co-glycolide) microspheres formed by
the solvent evaporation method. Eur J Pharm Biopharm.
2008;68(2):214–23.
20. Yow HN, Routh AF. Formation of liquid core-polymer shell
microcapsules. Soft Matter. 2006;2(11):940–9.
21. Passerini N, Craig DQM. An investigation into the effects of
residual water on the glass transition temperature of polylactide
microspheres using modulated temperature DSC. J Control
Release. 2001;73(1):111–5.
22. Levine H, Slade L. Water as a plasticizer: physico-chemical as-
pects of low-moisture polymeric systems. In: Franks F, editor.
Water science reviews. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;
1988. p. 79–185.
23. Blasi P, D’Souza SS, Selmin F, DeLuca PP. Plasticizing effect of
water on poly(lactide-co-glycolide). J Control Release.
2005;108(1):1–9.
24. AlKhatib HS, Taha MO, Aiedeh KM, Bustanji Y, Sweileh B.
Synthesis and in vitro behavior of iron-crosslinked N-methyl
and N-benzyl hydroxamated derivatives of alginic acid as con-
trolled release carriers. Eur Polym J. 2006;42(10):2464–74.
25. Taha MO, Nasser W, Ardakani A, AlKhatib HS. Sodium lauryl
sulfate impedes drug release from zinc-crosslinked alginate
beads: switching from enteric coating release into biphasic pro-
files. Int J Pharm. 2008;350(1–2):291–300.
26. Washington C. Drug release from microdisperse systems: a criti-
cal review. Int J Pharm. 1990;58(1):1–12.
27. Redhead HM, Davis SS, Illum L. Drug delivery in poly(lactide-
co-glycolide) nanoparticles surface modified with poloxamer 407
and poloxamine 908: in vitro characterisation and in vivo evalu-
ation. J Control Release. 2001;70(3):353–63.
28. Higuchi T. Rate of release of medicaments from ointment bases
containing drugs in suspension. J Pharm Sci. 1961;50(10):874–5.
29. Higuchi T. Mechanism of sustained‐action medication. Theoretical
analysis of rate of release of solid drugs dispersed in solid matrices. J
Pharm Sci. 1963;52(12):1145–9.
30. Peppas NA. Analysis of Fickian and non-Fickian drug release
from polymers. Pharm Acta Helv. 1984;60(4):110–1.
897
Aqueous Core-PLGA Shell Microcapsules