Frontiers in Medicine
About us
About us
•  Who we are
•  Mission and values
•  History
•  Leadership
•  Awards
•  Impact and progress
•  Frontiers' impact
•  Our annual reports
•  Publishing model
•  How we publish
•  Open access
•  Peer review
•  Research integrity
•  Research Topics
•  FAIR² Data Management
•  Fee policy
•  Services
•  Societies
•  National consortia
•  Institutional partnerships
•  Collaborators
•  More from Frontiers
•  Frontiers Forum
•  Frontiers Planet Prize
•  Press office
•  Sustainability
•  Career opportunities

•  Contact us
All journalsAll articlesSubmit your research
Search
Frontiers in Medicine
Sections
Sections
•  Dermatology
•  Family Medicine and Primary Care
•  Gastroenterology
•  Gene and Cell Therapy
•  Geriatric Medicine
•  Healthcare Professions Education
•  Hematology
•  Hepatobiliary Diseases
•  Infectious Diseases: Pathogenesis and Therapy
•  Intensive Care Medicine and Anesthesiology
•  Nephrology
•  Nuclear Medicine
•  Obstetrics and Gynecology
•  Ophthalmology
•  Pathology
•  Precision Medicine
•  Pulmonary Medicine
•  Regulatory Science
•  Rheumatology
•  Translational Medicine
ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board
About journal
About journal
•  Scope
•  Field chief editors

•  Mission & scope
•  Facts
•  Journal sections
•  Open access statement
•  Copyright statement
•  Quality
•  For authors
•  Why submit?
•  Article types
•  Author guidelines
•  Editor guidelines
•  Publishing fees
•  Submission checklist
•  Contact editorial office
About us
About us
•  Who we are
•  Mission and values
•  History
•  Leadership
•  Awards
•  Impact and progress
•  Frontiers' impact
•  Our annual reports
•  Publishing model
•  How we publish
•  Open access
•  Peer review
•  Research integrity
•  Research Topics
•  FAIR² Data Management
•  Fee policy
•  Services
•  Societies
•  National consortia

•  Institutional partnerships
•  Collaborators
•  More from Frontiers
•  Frontiers Forum
•  Frontiers Planet Prize
•  Press office
•  Sustainability
•  Career opportunities
•  Contact us
All journalsAll articlesSubmit your research
Frontiers in Medicine
Sections
Sections
•  Dermatology
•  Family Medicine and Primary Care
•  Gastroenterology
•  Gene and Cell Therapy
•  Geriatric Medicine
•  Healthcare Professions Education
•  Hematology
•  Hepatobiliary Diseases
•  Infectious Diseases: Pathogenesis and Therapy
•  Intensive Care Medicine and Anesthesiology
•  Nephrology
•  Nuclear Medicine
•  Obstetrics and Gynecology
•  Ophthalmology
•  Pathology
•  Precision Medicine
•  Pulmonary Medicine
•  Regulatory Science
•  Rheumatology
•  Translational Medicine
ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board
About journal
About journal

•  Scope
•  Field chief editors
•  Mission & scope
•  Facts
•  Journal sections
•  Open access statement
•  Copyright statement
•  Quality
•  For authors
•  Why submit?
•  Article types
•  Author guidelines
•  Editor guidelines
•  Publishing fees
•  Submission checklist
•  Contact editorial office
Frontiers in Medicine
Sections
Sections
•  Dermatology
•  Family Medicine and Primary Care
•  Gastroenterology
•  Gene and Cell Therapy
•  Geriatric Medicine
•  Healthcare Professions Education
•  Hematology
•  Hepatobiliary Diseases
•  Infectious Diseases: Pathogenesis and Therapy
•  Intensive Care Medicine and Anesthesiology
•  Nephrology
•  Nuclear Medicine
•  Obstetrics and Gynecology

•  Ophthalmology
•  Pathology
•  Precision Medicine
•  Pulmonary Medicine
•  Regulatory Science
•  Rheumatology
•  Translational Medicine
ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board
About journal
About journal
•  Scope
•  Field chief editors
•  Mission & scope
•  Facts
•  Journal sections
•  Open access statement
•  Copyright statement
•  Quality
•  For authors
•  Why submit?
•  Article types
•  Author guidelines
•  Editor guidelines
•  Publishing fees
•  Submission checklist
•  Contact editorial office
Submit your researchSearch

Your new experience awaits. Try the new design now and help us
make it even better
Switch to the new experience
ORIGINAL RESEARCH article
Front. Med., 06 December 2021
Sec. Translational Medicine
Volume 8 - 2021 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.781449
Exosomes From Human Urine-
Derived Stem Cells
Encapsulated Into PLGA
Nanoparticles for Therapy in
Mice With Particulate
Polyethylene-Induced
Osteolysis
[image]Hui Li1,2†[image]Yihe Hu1,2†[image]Min
Zeng1,2[image]Junxiao Yang1,2[image]Xiaolei Fan1,2[image]Yinan
Wang1,2[image]Jie Xie1,2*
•  1Department of Orthopedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China
•  2Hunan Engineering Research Center of Biomedical Metal and
Ceramic Implants, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China

Background: Periprosthetic osteolysis is the primary reason for
arthroplasty failure after total joint replacement because of the
generation of wear particles and subsequent bone erosion around
the prosthesis, which leads to aseptic loosening. Periprosthetic
osteolysis is often treated with revision surgery because of the lack
of effective therapeutic agents. As key messengers of intercellular
interactions, exosomes can be independently used as therapeutic
agents to promote tissue repair and regeneration. In this study, we
fabricated poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles (NPs)
that carry exosomes derived from human urine stem cells (USC-
Exos) and explored their effects on polyethylene-induced osteolysis.
Methods: USCs were identified by multipotent differentiation and
flow cytometry analyses. USC-Exos were isolated and identified by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering
(DLS), and western blotting. PLGA microspheres containing USC-
Exos were fabricated to synthesize NPs using the mechanical
double-emulsion method. The obtained NPs were characterized in
terms of stability, toxicity, exosome release, and cell uptake. Then,
these NPs were implanted into the murine air pouch model, and
their effects on polyethylene-induced osteolysis were evaluated by
microcomputed tomography (micro-CT) and histological analyses.
Results: The average NP diameter was ~282 ± 0.4 nm, and the
zeta potential was −2.02 ± 0.03 mV. After long-term storage at
room temperature and 4°C, the NP solution was stable without
significant coaggregation. In vitro release profiles indicated
sustained release of exosomes for 12 days. In vivo, injection of NPs
into the murine air pouch caused less osteolysis than that of USC-
Exos, and NPs significantly reduced bone absorption, as indicated
by histology and micro-CT scanning.
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that USC-Exo-based PLGA NPs
can prevent particulate polyethylene-induced osteolysis and bone
loss.
Introduction

Total joint replacement can effectively treat joint diseases such as
osteoarthritis, complex fractures, and osteonecrosis (1, 2). The total
number of joint replacement surgeries performed every year
worldwide is ~1.5 million, and the demand for this treatment is
expected to increase (3). Despite the continuous innovation of
artificial prosthesis manufacturing technology and a comprehensive
understanding of biomechanics, a substantial decline in revision
rates or second operations has not been achieved over the last
decade (4). The main reason for arthroplasty failure after total joint
replacement is aseptic loosening, representing ~75% of all cases
and severely impacting patients and the healthcare system (5). The
basic mechanism of periprosthetic osteolysis mainly starts with the
production of wear debris that induces macrophages or T
lymphocytes to release a series of inflammatory factors, such as
TNF-α and IL-6, which subsequently induce RANKL secretion,
osteoclast formation, and finally bone resorption (6, 7). Therefore,
inflammation, bone resorption, and foreign-body granuloma
formation around the bone-implant interface represent vital factors
leading to osteolysis (8). Presently, no effective agents or drugs to
inhibit or treat periprosthetic osteolysis have been approved, and
aseptic loosening can be treated only by revision surgery. An issue
concerning surgical revision that warrants consideration by
surgeons is the reduction in bone stock due to osteolysis defects and
restoration of the integrity of the proximal femur and acetabulum.
Hence, alternative therapeutic strategies for aseptic loosening are
required to ameliorate bone loss and promote bone regeneration.
Recently, exosomes derived from multivesicular bodies (MVBs)
have attracted increased attention in the field of tissue repair and
regeneration (9). Endosome-derived exosomes are 40–150-nm
nanoparticles that play important roles in regulating intercellular
interactions by delivering biomolecules (e.g., RNA and protein) to
recipient cells, in which biomolecules modulate the expression of
target genes or proteins and subsequently influence the function of
recipient cells (9). Exosomes are key intermediators of cellular
communication (9, 10) and are released by various cell types (11,
12). Additionally, USCs are considered significantly superior to
other stem cells because USCs can be isolated from collected human
urine samples using noninvasive, simple, safe and low-cost methods
(11). These advantages make USCs a promising cell source from

which to isolate exosomes. Recently, researchers determined that
exosomes obtained from human USCs (USC-Exos) significantly
promote bone formation and revascularization and inhibit
osteoclastic bone resorption (13, 14). In addition to their excellent
therapeutic effect on tissue repair and regeneration, exosomes are
regarded as promising biomaterials in the field of drug delivery
systems because of their superior aqueous stability, biocompatibility
and long blood circulation in vivo without obvious degeneration
(15). Therefore, exosomes could be used as sustained-release
therapeutic agents to design various drug delivery systems for
regenerative medicine.
Nanoparticulate delivery systems are increasingly being used
because of their advantages in potentially overcoming many
inherent obstacles associated with using free drugs or growth
factors. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) has been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration and European
Medicines Agency for drug release and is widely used in
pharmaceutical applications because of its excellent
biocompatibility and biodegradability (16). Various therapeutic
agents and drugs can be encapsulated into PLGA microspheres using
different methods (17). Additionally, PLGA microspheres can be
modified based on their natural properties to achieve the optimum
release rate in tissue (18). Therefore, PLGA microspheres are an
appropriate emerging carrier for drug and therapeutic agent
delivery in nanoparticulate delivery systems.
According to a previously published article, the high intensity
generated by sonication can damage the external structure of
exosomes, resulting in exosome reassembly during bioactive
nanoparticle formation (19). Based on the former conclusion, this
study proposes a sonication strategy using the mechanical double-
emulsion method to generate PLGA-Exo-based NPs and tests their
characteristics, biodistribution, and therapeutic effects in a murine
air pouch model of UHMWPE-induced osteolysis (SCHEME 1).
SCHEME 1
[image]
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of therapeutic USC-Exos released
from PLGA microspheres for wear particle-induced osteolysis

treatment.
Materials and Methods
Preparation of UHMWPE Microparticles
White micronized UHMWPE particles were purchased from
Shamrock TEDA (Tianjin, China). The density of UHMWPE was
0.97 g/cm3; thus, the particles floated on the culture medium when
added to the medium. Before use, UHMWPE was washed in 75%
ethanol and 100% ethanol for 3 days and then sterilized with cobalt
60 γ-radiation. The morphology and size distribution of UHMWPE
particles were tested by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and
DLS (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK), respectively.
Identification of the Human USCs
The isolation and identification of USCs were described in detail in
a previous study and were performed with a few modifications (13,
14, 20). Briefly, the midstream of human urine from a healthy male
donor aged 30 years was collected into a sterile 50-mL tube filled
with 500 μL of antibiotic-antimycotic solution (Gibco, USA). The 50
mL of urine was equally distributed into four sterile 15-mL tubes
and centrifuged at different speeds, and only 0.2 mL remained in
the bottom of the tube. Next, 1 mL of primary medium (Lonza,
USA) was added to the tube, and the cell pellet solution was
transferred into one well of a 12-well plate. The culture medium
was replaced with fresh proliferation medium every 2 or 3 days.
The plates were checked daily and cultured until the cells reached
80–90% confluence. P2-6 USCs were used for subsequent
experiments.
USCs were induced using specific differentiation medium (Cyagen
Biosciences, China) to test their multipotent differentiation
potential as described previously (13, 14). A pellet culture
technique was used to examine the chondrogenic differentiation of
USCs. After coculture for 30 days, alizarin red staining (ARS), oil

red O staining, and Alcian blue staining were performed to observe
the differentiation potential of USCs. The expression of
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) surface marker proteins on P4 USCs
was tested by flow cytometry according to previous articles (13,
14). All antibodies were purchased from BD Biosciences (San Jose,
CA, USA).
Isolation and Characterization of USC-Exos
USC-Exos were isolated from the culture supernatants according to
published studies (13, 14). After the cells were cultured with fresh
complete proliferation medium containing 10% exosome-free FBS
(Shanghai VivaCell Biosciences Ltd., China) for ~48 h, the medium
was collected and centrifuged using an Amicon Ultra15 Centrifugal
Filter Tube (10 kDa; Millipore). Finally, ~1 mL of ultrafiltration
solution was mixed uniformly with ExoQuick-TC Solution (System
Biosciences, USA) at a volume ratio of 5:1 by inversion. After
centrifugation at 1,500 × g for 30 min, the exosome pellets in the
bottom of the tube were resuspended in aseptic PBS based on the
volume of the exosome pellets. The protein content of exosomes
was measured using the BCA Assay Kit (Multi Sciences LTD.,
Hangzhou, China). The exosome solution was stored at −80°C until
use in subsequent experiments.
The expression of TSG101 (ab125011; Abcam), CD63 (sc-5275;
Santa), and calnexin (ab22595; Abcam) in isolated exosomes was
determined by western blotting as described previously (14). USC
extract was used as a control. The size distribution of USC-Exos was
measured by DLS. The morphology of exosomes was observed by
TEM (13, 14).
Determination of the Optimal Concentrations of
UHMWPE Particles
RAW 264.7 macrophages (5,000 cells/well) were cocultured with a
series of concentrations of UHMWPE particles (0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75,
and 1 mg/mL) for 5 days in 96-well-plates. A Cell Counting Kit-8 kit
(NCM Biotech, Suzhou, China) was used to measure cell viability.
First, the old medium was completely removed, and fresh DMEM
was mixed with the CCK-8 solution at a volume ratio of 10:1 and

quickly added to each well. A microplate reader was used to
measure the optical density (OD) at 450 nm.
TUNEL Apoptosis Detection kit
After 48 h of coculture with UHMWPE particles or UHMWPE
particles + USC-Exos, RAW 264.7 cells were stained using a TUNEL
kit (KeyGen Biotech, China). The nuclei were stained with DAPI
(Solarbio, Beijing, China). Next, the stained cells were examined
and captured under a fluorescence microscope (Leica, Germany).
Exosome Uptake Assay
We labeled USC-Exos with PKH26 fluorescent dye (Sigma-Aldrich)
to observe whether RAW 264.7 cells can internalize exosomes.
Briefly, 1.0 mL of Diluent C was added to 800 μg of exosome
solution. Then, 4 μL of PKH26 dye was added to the mixture and
cocultured for 5 min at room temperature in the absence of light.
The labeled exosomes were then centrifuged at 100,000 rpm for
~25 min at 4°C, and the exosome pellet was suspended in PBS and
used for uptake experiments. RAW 264.7 cells were seeded into
glass coverslips (Solarbio) and cultured for 24 h until reaching 80–
90% density. We then cocultured 25 μL (100 μg) of PKH26-labeled
USC-Exos with RAW 264.7 cells in serum-free DMEM culture
medium for 4, 12 and 24 h. After the cells were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 20 min and permeabilized with 0.1%
Triton X-100, the cells were stained with phalloidin Alexa Fluor 488
(A12379; Invitrogen, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. Images
were examined and captured under a fluorescence microscope
(Leica, Germany).
Osteoclastic Differentiation Assay
RAW 264.7 cells were seeded into 48-well-plates and cultured
overnight in DMEM. Then, the cells were randomized into the
following three groups with three wells per group: DMEM + PBS;
DMEM + RANKL + PBS; and DMEM + RANKL + USC-Exos. The
medium was replaced with fresh DMEM supplemented with 100
ng/mL RANKL (ProteinTech, USA) and 300 μg/mL USC-Exos or an
equal volume of vehicle (PBS) after cell adhesion. The culture

medium was replaced every other day. Eight days later, the cells
were fixed in 4% PFA for 25 min and then stained using a
commercial TRAP kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The numbers of TRAP+
osteoclasts were counted under a microscope (Leica). The culture
medium was collected on the fourth day and evaluated by ELISA
[MULTI SCIENCES (LIANKE) BIOTECH, Hangzhou, China]. The
levels of osteoclast-related genes were analyzed by RT-qPCR.
Osteogenic Differentiation Assay
Three-week-old C57BL/6 mice were sacrificed to isolate bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs). Briefly, BMSCs
were obtained from the femurs and tibias of the mice. After
centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 5 min, the cells were resuspended in
α-MEM (Gibco, USA). P1 BMSCs were used in subsequent
experiments. BMSCs were seeded into 48-well-plates (1.0 × 105/
well). Twenty-four hours later, the old medium was replaced with
fresh osteogenesis induction culture medium (Cyagen Biosciences,
China) with or without USC-Exos (100 μg/mL). The culture medium
was replaced every 2 days. On the 4th day, the old cell medium was
collected, and the levels of alkaline phosphatase and calcium were
evaluated using commercial kits (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering
Institute, China). After induction for 14 days, the cells were stained
with ARS solution (Cyagen Biosciences, China). Representative
images were examined and captured under an inverted microscope
(Leica DMI6000B, Germany).
Fabrication and Characterization of USC-Exo-Based
PLGA NPs
USC-Exos encapsulated into PLGA microspheres were fabricated
using a standard mechanical double emulsion technique with
modifications (21, 22). First, 100 mg of 0.67 dL/g carboxy-
terminated 50:50 PLGA (Jinan Daigang Biomaterial Co., Ltd., Jinan,
China) was added to 3 mL of dichloromethane (DCM). Next, the
USC-Exo solution was dissolved in 4% cold poly(vinyl alcohol)
(PVA) under low-speed shaking for 30 min and slowly injected into
DCM containing PLGA for 5 min. The resulting PLGA solution was
mixed with the USC-Exos at a weight ratio of 10:1. The mixture was
emulsified for 2 min (5 s-0-5 s) using an ultrasonic processor (20

kHz; 130 W; SONIC AND MATERIALS INC., USA). Deionized water
(20 mL) was added to the solution and stirred overnight until DCM
was completely volatilized. Finally, the mixture was washed three
times with PBS at 10,000 rpm for 10 min, and the resulting NP
solution was stored at 4°C.
NP size and zeta potential were examined by DLS (Malvern, UK).
The morphology of NPs was determined by TEM.
The in vitro release of total protein was measured over a period of
12 days, and the cumulative release curve was plotted based on the
values. The release profile was assessed using a BCA assay kit (Multi
Sciences LTD., Hangzhou, China). Briefly, 2.5 mg of NPs was added
to a 1.5-mL sterile tube containing 1 mL of PBS, and then, the
mixture was placed in a 37°C incubator (n = 3). Next, 20 μL of PBS
supernatant was replaced with fresh PBS solution on days 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10
min. The content of the released protein was detected, and the
released percentage was calculated.
The in vitro biodegradability of NPs was evaluated by assessing the
changes in the size and zeta potential by DLS (Malvern, UK) at
room temperature and 4°C.
Cellular Uptake Assay of NPs
To investigate the cellular uptake phenomenon of PLGA-based NPs,
NPs (10 mg/mL PLGA) fabricated from PLGA microspheres were
labeled with DiI (Beyotime, Shanghai, China), and USC-Exos were
labeled with DiO (Yeasen, Shanghai, China) and then incubated
with RAW 264.7 cells (1 × 104 cells) in 6-well-plates at 37°C for 12
and 24 h. Before incubation, the cells were cultured in the wells
overnight to recover. After incubation, cell nuclei were stained with
DAPI (Solarbio, Beijing, China). Cell images were evaluated on a
fluorescence microscope (Zeiss LSM 410, Germany).
In vitro Evaluation of Cytotoxicity
After 24 h of incubation in high-glucose DMEM, RAW 264.7 cells
were incubated with different concentrations of NPs (0.02–0.10

mg/mL PLGA) for 24 h. A commercial CCK-8 kit (NCM Biotech,
China) was used to evaluate cell proliferation.
Murine Pouch Model of Bone Resorption and
Treatment
Animal studies were approved by the Laboratory Animal Research
Center of Central South University (No. 2019030499). Forty-eight
female BALB/c mice (8–10 weeks old) were purchased in total. The
detailed procedure to establish the mouse air pouch model was
performed according to previous articles with slight modifications
(23). Briefly, 2 × 2 cm2 dorsal skin was disinfected with alcohol
and shaved to expose the pouch site. One milliliter of sterile air was
injected at a single site using a 25-gauge needle and 2-mL syringe
every other day for 7 days to maintain the air pouch. Seven days
later, mice that successfully established air pouches were
anaesthetized. The congeneric mice were sacrificed as calvarial
bone donors (sixteen mice in total; one donor provided a cranial
bone implant for two recipients). Thereafter, a 0.5-cm-long incision
was made along the skin of the pouch, and one piece of ~0.5 ×
0.5-cm calvarial bone from a donor mouse was inserted into the
pouch using forceps. Next, 20 mg of UHMWPE was added to the air
pouch to stimulate the inflammatory reaction and bone osteolysis.
4-0 sutures were used to close the skin incision. Twenty-four hours
postoperation, 32 mice were randomly divided into the following
four groups of 8 to receive local injections into the pouches: the
vehicle control group (sterile PBS); the UHMWPE + PBS group
(200 μL); the UHMWPE + USC-Exos group (200 μL, 200 μg); and
the UHMWPE + NPs group (200 μL, 200 μg). The mice were
sacrificed on day 21, and both the pouch membrane and implanted
bone were harvested (n = 8 per group) and fixed in 10% PFA for
paraffin embedding.
Fluorescent Imaging for the Biodistribution of NPs
Equal volumes of USC-Exos (200 μL, 200 μg) and NPs (200 μL, 200
μg) loaded with DiI were injected into murine air pouches. Equal
volumes of PBS (200 μL) were used as the control. Fluorescent
images were obtained after day(s) 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 14 using a
fluorescence tomography imaging system (Bruker, USA). Fourteen

days after the injection, major organs were collected for
biodistribution studies.
Micro-CT Analysis
High-resolution micro-CT (PerkinElmer, Aartselaar, USA) was used
to quantitatively analyze the implanted bone mass. The calvariums
(n = 7 or 8) were scanned at 36 mm FOV, with 72 μm pixel size
and 90 kV and 80 μA X-ray energy. After the effective data were
obtained, the two-dimensional images were reconstructed into
three-dimensional images, which were then carefully observed to
determine the erosion surface. The bone mineral density (BMD) and
bone volume fraction (bone volume/total volume, BV/TV) were
calculated to assess bone loss using auxiliary software (Analyze
12.0, USA).
Histological Staining and Analysis
After micro-CT scanning, formalin-fixed implanted bones were
decalcified in 10% EDTA for 7 days. Next, H&E staining was used to
stain tissue sections (6 μm) to observe pouch membrane
inflammation and bone erosion. A histochemical TRAP kit (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was used to evaluate osteoclast-like
cells in the implanted calvariums, and the numbers of osteoclasts
over the adjacent bone surface (N/mm) were calculated. A light
microscope (Olympus CX31; Olympus Optical Co., Tokyo, Japan)
was used to examine and capture images of the stained sections. In
total, six points in each section were used to measure pouch
membrane thickness as previously described (23). The images were
analyzed using Image-Pro Plus.
Safety Examination
Blood from each group was sampled after anesthesia and analyzed
using routine blood tests to assess immunogenicity. H&E staining of
the main organs was used to evaluate the safety of the NPs and
USC-Exos.
RT-qPCR Analysis

Total cellular RNA from each sample was extracted. The 2−ΔΔCT
method was used to calculate gene expression, and GAPDH was
used as the internal control. The primer sequences were as follows:
Trap: forward, 5′-TGGTCCAGGAGCTTAACTGC-3′, and reverse, 5′-
GTCAGGAGTGGGAGCCATATG-3′; Mmp9: forward, 5′-
ACCCGAAGCGGACATT-3′, and reverse, 5′-
GGCATCTCCCTGAACG-3′; Gapdh: forward, 5′-
ATCCCATCACCATCTTCC-3′, and reverse, 5′-
GAGTCCTTCCACGATACCA-3′.
Statistical Analysis
All data are shown as the means ± standard deviation (SD).
Statistical analysis of the data was performed using SPSS 19.0
software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Analyses were performed
using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and Tukey's post-hoc
test was used. P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
UHMWPE Particle Characterization
SEM and DLS were used to assess the morphology and size
distribution of UHMWPE particles (Figures 1A,B). The classical
morphology of UHMWPE particles is characterized by an irregular
shape and rough surface (Figure 1A). Regarding size distributions,
more than 90% of the particles were in the size range of 0.5–5 μm
(Figure 1B).
FIGURE 1
[image]
Figure 1. Characterization of UHMWPE microparticles, USCs and
USC-Exos. (A) SEM image of UHMWPE microparticles (scale bar, 20
μm). (B) UHMWPE was analyzed for size distribution using DLS. (C)
USCs had a spindle-like morphology. Scale bar, 30 μm. After culture
in osteogenic, adipogenic or chondrogenic induction medium, USCs
could differentiate into osteoblasts (D-a; scale bar, 30 μm),

adipocytes (D-b; scale bar, 30 μm) or chondrocytes (D-c; scale bar,
30 μm). (E) Flow cytometry analysis of the typical surface markers
in USC-Exos. (F) USC growth curve. (G) Morphology of USC-Exos
under transmission electron microscopy. Scale bar, 100 nm. (H)
Detection of exosome surface markers in USC-Exos by western
blotting. (I) Size distribution of USC-Exos calculated by DLS. The
data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. The
experiment was repeated three times independently.
Characterization of USCs and USC-Exos
The morphology of human urine cells at different times after
collection is shown in Supplementary Figure 1. The adherent USCs
possessed a fibroblast-like morphology (Figure 1C). The USCs could
differentiate into osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic lineages,
as detected by ARS staining, toluidine blue staining and oil red O
staining, respectively (Figure 1D). The USCs were characterized by
flow cytometry for common MSC markers (Figure 1E). Additionally,
the CCK-8 assay showed that the USCs grew rapidly from day 3 to
7, and growth slowed 7 days later (Figure 1F). SEM, DLS, and
western blotting were used to evaluate the isolated extracellular
particles. First, TEM showed that the extracellular particles
possessed a cup-shaped morphology with a double-layered
membrane structure (Figure 1G). Second, western blot analysis
demonstrated that the extracellular particles secreted by USCs were
positive for CD63 and TSG101 but negative for calnexin (Figure
1H). Finally, the size distribution was measured using DLS,
demonstrating that these particles mainly ranged from 50 to 150
nm in size (Figure 1I). Together, these data demonstrated that the
extracellular particles released from USCs in the study were
exosomes.
Cell Proliferation and Apoptosis Analysis in RAW
264.7 Cells After UHMWPE or USC-Exo Exposure
To determine the optimal concentration for UHMWPE particles,
different concentrations of UHMWPE particles were cultured with
RAW 264.7 cells. RAW 264.7 cells phagocytosed UHMWPE particles
(dark dots) (Figure 2A); 1 mg/mL UHMWPE particles (dark dots)

were obviously internalized into the cells, and the particles did not
severely influence cell viability (Figure 2B). Thus, we selected 1
mg/mL UHMWPE particles as the optimal concentration for use in
downstream experiments. The TUNEL assay was performed to
observe RAW 264.7 cell apoptosis after coculturing with UHMWPE
particles or USC-Exos. Figure 2C shows representative images of
TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells exposed to UHMWPE or UHMWPE
+ USC-Exos compared with the nonparticle-containing medium. No
obvious differences were found in the number of apoptotic cells
among the polyethylene particle and polyethylene particle + USC-
Exo groups.
FIGURE 2
[image]
Figure 2. Effects of UHMWPE and UHMWPE + USC-Exos on the
viability of RAW 264.7. (A) Various concentrations of UHMWPE
particles (dark dots) were internalized into the cells. Scale bar, 30
μm. (B) RAW 264.7 proliferation was measured after coculturing
with UHMWPE. (C) Representative images of TUNEL staining in
RAW 264.7 cells exposed to 1 mg/mL particles for 48 h. Scale bar,
50 μm. (D) Representative immunofluorescence images showing the
internalization of PKH26-labeled USC-Exos (red) by RAW 264.7
cells stained with phalloidin (green) at 4, 12, and 24 h. Cell nuclei
were stained with DAPI (blue). White arrows indicate exosomes
(red). Scale bar, 20 μm. The data are expressed as the mean ±
standard deviation. The experiment was repeated three times
independently.
Internalization of Exosomes by RAW 264.7 Cells
We cocultured PKH26-labeled exosomes with RAW 264.7 cells for
4, 12, and 24 h to observe whether exosomes could access the
cytoplasm of RAW 264.7 cells. Fluorescence microscopy images
(Figure 2D) showed that PKH26-labeled USC-Exos (red dots) were
gradually endocytosed into RAW 264.7 cells from 4 to 24 h.
Twenty-four hours postcoculture, PKH26-labeled exosomes were
largely endocytosed and spread in the cytoplasm.

Fabrication and Characterization of NPs
The schematic design of NPs is summarized in Figure 3A. First,
USC-Exos were incorporated into PLGA microspheres to form NPs.
TEM imaging confirmed the empty PLGA microspheres and NPs
(Figure 3B). A TEM image of NPs showed a spherical shell, and
USC-Exos were dispersed in the core of PLGA microspheres (Figure
3B), similar to previous reports (22). NanoSight characterization
revealed that the size of the NPs was ~282 ± 0.4 nm, which was
slightly greater than that of empty PLGA particles (262 ± 2.0 nm).
The zeta potential of the NPs was −2.02 ± 0.03 mV (Figure 3C).
Thereafter, the stability of the NPs was measured by observing the
changes in size and zeta potential over time at room temperature
and 4°C. The NPs remained stable for more than 6 days, with a
negligible increase in size and zeta potential (Figures 3D,E). The
release profiles were determined over 12 days (Figure 3F).
FIGURE 3
[image]
Figure 3. Physiochemical and biological properties of NPs. (A)
Schematic illustration of the preparation of NPs. (B) TEM image of
PLGA microspheres and NPs fabricated with the mechanical double-
emulsion method. Scale bar, 500 nm (left) and 100 nm (right). (C)
Diameters (nm, left) and zeta potentials (mV, right) of PLGA
microspheres and NPs measured by DLS (n = 3). *P < 0.05. (D)
Size change of NPs after storage at room temperature (left) and at
4°C (right) (n = 3 for each time point). (E) Zeta potential of NPs
after storage at room temperature (left) and at 4°C (right) (n = 3
for each time point). (F) Quantitative analyses of the releases of
exosomes from NPs over time. The data are expressed as the mean
± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed using one-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and Tukey's post-hoc test was
used. The experiment was repeated three times independently.
In vitro Bioactivity of USC-Exos and NPs
RAW264.7 cells were stimulated with RANKL and cocultured with
USC-Exos or PBS for 7 days to observe the influence of USC-Exos on

osteoclastogenesis. TRAP staining images showed that RAW 264.7
cells induced by RANKL differentiated into many TRAP+
osteoclasts, whereas USC-Exo treatment suppressed osteoclast
formation (Figures 4A,B). RT-qPCR analysis demonstrated that the
RANKL-induced groups had high expression levels of Mmp9 and
Trap mRNA compared with the vehicle group, but the effect was
strongly inhibited by USC-Exos (Figures 4C,D). The values of TNF-α
and IL-6 in the CM from the RANKL + PBS group were higher than
those in the CM from the other two groups, and USC-Exo
intervention obviously decreased the production of TNF-α and IL-6,
as assessed by ELISA (Figures 4E,F). BMSCs were cultured in
osteogenic induction medium containing USC-Exos or an equal
volume of PBS to observe the effects of USC-Exos on the formation
of osteoblasts. ARS staining showed that USC-Exos obviously
enhanced the formation of calcium nodules (Figures 4G–J).
FIGURE 4
[image]
Figure 4. In vitro bioactivity of USC-Exos and NPs. (A) Osteoclast
differentiation of RAW 264.7 cells from different groups determined
by TRAP staining. Scale bar, 30 μm. (B) The numbers of TRAP+
multinucleated (>3 nuclei) osteoclasts were counted. n = 3 per
group. *P < 0.05. The expression levels of Mmp9 (C) and Trap (D)
were assessed by RT-qPCR analyses. n = 3 per group. The
concentrations of TNF-α (E) and IL-6 (F) were determined by
ELISA. n = 3 per group. *P < 0.01. (G) Alizarin red S (ARS)
staining of BMSCs from different groups under osteogenic inductive
conditions. Scale bars, 30 μm. Quantitative analyses of ARS+ area
(H), ALP (I) and Ca2+ (J) in conditioned media from BMSCs
receiving different treatments. n = 3 per group. *P < 0.05. (K)
Percentages of proliferating RAW 264.7 cells under various NP
concentration treatments (n = 3 for each group). (L) Macrophage
uptake of NPs after 12 h (a) and 24 h (b) of coincubation (n = 3 for
each group). Scale bar, 30 μm. The data are expressed as the mean
± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed using one-
way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and Tukey's post-hoc test was
used. The experiment was repeated three times independently.
We cocultured RAW 264.7 cells using different concentrations of

NPs in vitro. The CCK-8 cell proliferation assay revealed that with
increasing concentrations of NPs, the viability of macrophages
increased, indicating that NPs were noncytotoxic (Figure 4K). We
also designed dual fluorescent NPs by labeling PLGA with DiI (red
fluorescence) and USC-Exos with DiO (green fluorescence) to
explore the internalization mechanism of these NPs. We cultured
RAW 264.7 cells using these biomimetic NPs for 12 h (Figure 4La,
Supplementary Figure 2) and 24 h (Figure 4Lb, Supplementary
Figure 2). RAW 264.7 cells cocultured with fluorescently labeled
NPs showed obvious internalization of DiI and DiO into the
cytoplasm, demonstrating the entry of NPs into cells by endocytosis
(Figure 4L). Additionally, the locations of the PLGA microspheres
and USC-Exos were identical, suggesting that the USC-Exos were
successfully encapsulated into the PLGA microspheres during the
synthesis process, and the fluorescence signal intensity was higher
at 24 h.
Biodistribution of NPs in Mice With UHMWPE-
Induced Osteoclastic Bone Resorption
To investigate the biodistribution of NPs, we first established a
mouse bone resorption model and then injected NPs and USC-Exos
labeled with DiR into the air pouches of mice. PBS was injected as a
control. The mice were imaged using IVIS equipment at the
indicated times. The fluorescence intensity gradually decreased
within 2 weeks, but fluorescence was still detected in the local air
pouch at the end time (Figure 5A). Higher fluorescence was
observed for NPs than USC-Exos at the indicated time, and the
fluorescence signal of NPs was sustained at a high level at the
endpoint (Figures 5A,C). Next, the major organs were harvested at
the endpoint, and the fluorescence signal could not be detected in
the brain, lung, heart, liver, spleen, or kidneys (Figure 5B). This
finding indicates that NP translation and efficacy may be hindered
by the air pouch. Because the DiR-labeled USC-Exos and NPs were
maintained for ~2 weeks, we chose to sacrifice the animals on day
21.
FIGURE 5
[image]

Figure 5. NP biodistribution in the air pouch of mice by
fluorescence imaging in vivo. (A) DiR-labeled USC-Exos and NPs
were injected into the air pouch of the mice, and then these mice
were imaged by IVIS at the indicated times. (B) Fourteen days after
injection, the mice were sacrificed, and the organs were removed
for imaging. (C) Quantitative fluorescent intensities shown in (A), n
= 3 per group. The data are expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation. Every group contained three species independently.
NP Therapy Prevents UHMWPE-Induced Osteoclastic
Bone Resorption
The cranial bone implants were well-tolerated in the air pouch by
recipient mice for up to 21 days with no noticeable skin infection.
UHMWPE particles induced inflammation in the pouch membrane
and implant bones, a finding that was consistent with previous
findings (23). The gross pathology shown in Figure 6A
demonstrated that air pouches supplemented with UHMWPE
particles caused a serious inflammatory reaction in mice compared
with pouches without UHMWPE particles. USC-Exo and NP
treatment alleviated the inflammatory response induced by
UHMWPE particles, as shown by the decreased irritant tissue
proliferation around the bone in the air pouch.
FIGURE 6
[image]
Figure 6. Representative images of pouch tissues and micro-CT
evaluation of the implanted bones. (A) Typical macroscopic images
of air pouches and the implanted calvarial bone dissected from
mice. (B) Examples of micro-CT surface images of the implanted
calvarial bone among groups. n = 4 or 5 per group. (C)
Quantification of bone fraction volume/total volume in (B). n = 4
or 5 per group. *P < 0.05. (D) Quantification of bone mineral
densities in (B). n = 4 or 5 per group. *P < 0.05. The data are
expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis
was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and
Tukey's post-hoc test was used. Every group contained 4 or 5 species
independently.

Micro-CT scanning was used to assess the influence of NPs on the
implant cranial bone mass in mice. Micro-CT analysis indicated that
the implanted calvarial bones without UHMWPE introduction
maintained normal bone mass, and the osteolysis mouse model with
UHMWPE introduction demonstrated osteolytic phenotypes, as
indicated by significantly reduced BV/TV and BMD values (Figures
6B–D). Additionally, with the loading of exosomes into PLGA
microspheres, the BV/TV and BMD values were higher than those of
pure exosomes, indicating that the NPs inhibited osteoclastic
activity to preserve bone microstructure through sustained release
of exosomes (Figures 6C,D).
Next, we performed H&E staining of the implanted bone to observe
the changing status of osteolysis during treatment (Figures 7A,C).
H&E staining of air pouch membranes and the implanted bones
differed among the groups (Figure 7A). The presence of UHMWPE
particles induced local inflammatory reactions, as shown by the
rises in membrane thickness and bone absorption compared with
those in the nonparticle-containing groups. These effects were
significantly alleviated by NP and USC-Exo treatment (Figures
7A,C). Inflammatory cells eroded into the bone, resulting in the
erosion of bone in contact with pouch membranes. Higher
membrane thickness around the bone and absorption of the bone
were observed in the UHMWPE + PBS-treated groups; however, the
NP and USC-Exo treatment groups showed alleviated results. The
membrane thickness data were also consistent with the results of
H&E staining, which showed the thinnest membrane in the NP
group, followed by the exosome treatment group and the control
group (Figure 7C).
FIGURE 7
[image]
Figure 7. Therapeutic effect of NPs in mice with particulate
polyethylene-induced osteolysis. (A) Representative images of H&E
staining in implanted bones posttreatment. Scale bar, 100 μm. n =
4 or 5 per group. (B) Representative images of TRAP staining in
implanted bones posttreatment. Scale bar, 100 μm. n = 4 or 5 per
group. (C) Quantification of membrane thickness around the
implanted bones in (A). n = 3 or 4 per group. *P < 0.05.

Quantification of the number of osteoclasts (OCs, D) and OCs/BS
(E) on the trabecular bone surface in (B). n = 4 or 5 per group. *P
< 0.05. The data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation.
Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA), and Tukey's post-hoc test was used. Every group
contained 4 or 5 species independently.
TRAP staining was used to observe whether NPs and USC-Exos
could suppress UHMWPE-induced osteolysis. The TRAP staining
results of the implanted bone are shown in Figure 7B. Many
osteoclasts were observed in the UHMWPE + PBS group, and the
number of osteoclasts was higher than that in the other three
groups (i.e., the exosome, NP and control groups) (Figures 7B,D,E).
The control group without the introduction of UHMWPE showed
fewer osteoclasts than the other three groups. However, an
obviously minimal number of TRAP+ cells was observed in the NP
treatment group (Figures 7D,E). These data were also consistent
with H&E staining, in which the NP group showed lower membrane
thickness and bone absorption than the UHMWPE + PBS and USC-
Exo groups.
Safety of NPs
Currently, the major concerns regarding the in vivo application of
NPs and USC-Exos are in regard to their safety. The red blood cell
test results showed no significant differences between the different
groups (Figures 8A–C), and H&E staining of the major organs
showed no noticeable histopathological changes in the groups
(Figure 8D).
FIGURE 8
[image]
Figure 8. Biocompatibility and safety of NP treatment. (A) White
blood cells, red blood cells and platelets were tested in the groups
at day 21. n = 4 or 5 per group. (B) Proportions of differential
white blood cells after NP treatment. n = 4 or 5 per group. (C)
Routine blood examination parameters after NP treatment. n = 4 or
5 per group. (D) H&E staining of major organs in the groups; scale
bar, 100 μm. n = 4 per group. The data are expressed as the mean

± standard deviation. Every group contained 4 or 5 species
independently.
Discussion
Joint instability, infection and patellofemoral problems are the
main reasons for reoperation in the early years after primary total
joint replacement; however, one of the most common and critical
late complications leading to arthroplasty failure is aseptic
loosening caused by periprosthetic osteolysis (24). Periprosthetic
osteolysis initially begins with the production of wear debris via the
mechanical wear of the prosthesis, which gradually accumulates at
the bone-implant interface, playing an increasingly important role
in inducing osteolysis (25). Aseptic loosening is a complex issue
that requires thorough evaluation and a detailed preoperative plan.
Prosthetic products have a fundamental influence on biological
parameters in the bone-prosthesis environment. UHMWPE particles
produced from prostheses have been increasingly considered to
have the ability to induce inflammatory reactions and osteolysis
(26–28), which would directly cause the failure of total joint
arthroplasty (TJA). Revision TJA raises concerns about remaining
bone defects and joint instability. Additionally, the revision
operation has been associated with high patient morbidity and great
financial burden for the health care system (29, 30).
In this study, we used readily available and unlimited human urine
samples to obtain stem cells and isolate exosomes from these cells.
MSC-derived exosomes contain bioactive components, such as RNA
and proteins, which can be delivered to recipient cells to regulate
intercellular interactions, thereby promoting bone regeneration (12,
14, 31). USC-derived exosomes also contain a range of biological
proteins, including DMBT1 to promote angiogenesis and CTHRC1
and OPG to promote osteogenesis and inhibit osteoclastogenesis, as
reported in a previous study (13, 14). Therefore, exosomes
represent great promise in regenerative medicine and drug delivery
systems; however, inherent obstacles, such as their rapid
elimination by macrophages and long-term preservation of their
bioactive function in the blood circulation, must be overcome (32).

In a drug sustained release system, the main requirement for the
successful delivery of various therapeutic drugs or agents is to
preserve their bioactive components during the process of
encapsulation and release. Hence, a strategy that allows for a
controlled release and maintains the biological properties of stem
cell-derived exosomes is needed to effectively promote tissue repair
and regeneration. Here, we utilized the double-emulsion method to
fabricate designer NPs with small sizes and core-shell structures by
loading PLGA particles with USC-Exos to preserve the biological
properties of USC-Exos. Additionally, the TEM image of the NPs
(Figure 3B) and the double-labeled dye results of the NPs (Figure
4L) showed that USC-Exos could be encapsulated into
biodegradable PLGA microspheres via ultrasonic emulsification,
which can maintain their cargo and biological activity during the
manufacturing process. Our study demonstrates that the size of NPs
is 280 nm, which is smaller than that previously reported (22), and
the zeta potential is slightly negative and can support long-term
storage without significant coaggregation. USC-Exos were released
only as the PLGA microspheres degenerated, and our results showed
that USC-Exos could be controlled for release from NPs for 12 days
in vitro (Figure 3F) and could maintain sustained release for ~14
days in vivo (Figure 5A). Designer NPs are also easily injected in
vivo, allow the local and sustained release of USC-Exos and
modulate downstream cell activities in the same way as
management in vitro (33). We provide evidence that local air pouch
injection of synthetic NPs with therapeutic USC-Exo release could
suppress implanted calvarial bone absorption in a murine osteolysis
model compared with the injection of exosomes alone by inhibiting
osteoclastogenesis. The efficient amelioration of bone absorption
was likely due to the sustained release of bioactive exosomes
encapsulated into the PLGA microspheres. The NP group showed
evident advantages in the study compared with the exosome group
because NPs efficiently preserved the biological activity of
exosomes and released them to mediate bone protection in vivo;
nevertheless, a single local injection of USC-Exos in the air pouch
could cause the USC-Exos to degenerate quickly or be phagocytized
by the macrophages. Thus, we believe that biological techniques
that use exosomes as sustained release drugs may have considerable
value and clinical advantages in the treatment of osteolysis.

At present, many methods and excellent biomaterials (e.g.,
scaffolds, hydrogels, or PLGA microspheres) have been reported to
deliver exosomes to optimize in vivo applications and achieve
sustained release (22, 33–37), and significant effects have been
obtained. Recently, researchers have reported advanced methods to
deliver exosomes via microfluidic devices (33); however, the
purchase and utilization of instruments and equipment may limit
their large-scale application. Other researchers have utilized
physical cross linking to incorporate exosomes and fabricate
delivery systems (34–37). In our study, we attempted to fabricate
designer NPs by loading PLGA nanoparticles with USC-Exos via the
double-emulsion method; our results showed that the method
successfully loaded the exosomes. However, the lack of data to
calculate the drug loading capacity and encapsulation efficiency is a
limitation of the study. Our study also lacks information about the
underlying mechanisms of exosomes in the treatment process,
which requires further exploration in our follow-up experiments. As
previously reported, exosomes contain many functional proteins
and miRNAs (9, 12–14, 31, 36), and the substantial enrichment of
proteins in USC-Exos, such as DMBT1 and TIMP1 (13) and CTHRC1
and OPG (14), is involved in the regulation of bone metabolism
during the therapeutic process. These verified molecular
mechanisms are also applicable to our current research because our
research also investigated bone metabolism. However, we should
refer to the current research results and explore and verify new
functional proteins or miRNAs in USC-Exos in our follow-up
experiments to provide a comprehensive and in-depth study about
the mechanism of osteolysis. We also noticed that comparing with
sited reference, there is a different result in western blot analysis of
exosomal markers in USCs and USC-Exos presented by previously
published article (14). However, our results are consistent with
those of other researchers (38–41). USCs produce and secrete
exosomes to the extracellular environment, and the method to
collect and isolate USC-Exos from the culture medium is the
exosomal enrichment process, hence the different protein quantities
and contents in USCs and USC-Exos may be the main reason for the
difference in western blot analysis of exosomal markers in USCs and
USC-Exos. Besides the individual difference between the donors, the
different passage of USCs, the different loading amount of the
protein, or the different voltage value and current value, et al., to

perform the western blot analysis also may have influence on the
different results.
In summary, USC-Exos incorporated into PLGA microspheres
showed great potential in ameliorating particulate polyethylene-
induced osteolysis. According to a previous study, exosomes can be
easily endocytosed into recipient cells because of their cup-shaped
structure with a lipid bilayer, nanosize and favorable density (42).
Thus, exosomes have shown great advantages in the field of
nanomedicine (43). Researchers and clinicians have developed
multiple clinical trials investigating the therapeutic effects of
exosomes; however, no effective and safe drug has been approved,
which may be due to the insufficient knowledge of exosomes and
their bioactive components (44). Additionally, regarding the clinical
application of USC-Exos in preventing and treating periprosthetic
osteolysis, a standard process for the isolation, purification and
storage of exosomes with low cost and degradation should be
established (45). Furthermore, synthesizing new multifunctional
bioactive materials with long-term and sustained exosome release
and maintaining exosome integrity and bioactivity throughout the
process of encapsulation and release are vital to promote tissue
repair and regeneration (46, 47).
Conclusion
We successfully fabricated NPs with long-term and sustained
exosome release for orthopedic wear debris particle-induced
osteolysis treatment. Our study presents a new strategy to
synthesize PLGA-loaded exosome bioactive NPs for the delivery of
therapeutic agents.
Data Availability Statement
All the data supporting the findings of this study are available
within the paper and its supplementary information. Raw data for

the figures in this study are available from the authors upon
request.
Ethics Statement
This study was approved by the Department of Laboratory Animal
Management Committee of Central South University (No.
2019030499) and was conducted according to all current ethics
guidelines.
Author Contributions
JX and YH conceived and designed the experiments. HL, MZ, JY,
XF, and YW performed the experiments. HL analyzed the data and
prepared all the figures. HL, YH, and JX drafted the manuscript. All
authors reviewed and approved the manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 81974339) and the Science and
Technology Plan Project of Hunan Province (Grant No.
2019JJ40499).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed
as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher's Note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary Material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmed.2021.781449/
full#supplementary-material
References
1. Navarro Espigares JL, Hernández Torres E. Cost-outcome
analysis of joint replacement: evidence from a Spanish public
hospital. Gac Sanit. (2008) 22:337–43. doi:
10.1157/13125355
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
2. Talmo CT, Aghazadeh M, Bono JV. Perioperative
complications following total joint replacement. Clin Geriatr
Med. (2012) 28:471–87. doi: 10.1016/j.cger.2012.05.006
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
3. Gallo J, Goodman SB, Lostak J, Janout M. Advantages and
disadvantages of ceramic on ceramic total hip arthroplasty: a
review. Biomed Pap Olomouc. (2012) 156:204–12. doi:

10.5507/bp.2012.063
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
4. Thiele K, Perka C, Matziolis G, Mayr HO, Sostheim M, Hube
R. Current failure mechanisms after knee arthroplasty have
changed: polyethylene wear is less common in revision
surgery. J Bone Joint Surg Am. (2015) 97:715–20. doi:
10.2106/JBJS.M.01534
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
5. Langlois J, Hamadouche M. New animal models of wear-
particle osteolysis. Int Orthop. (2011) 35:245–51. doi:
10.1007/s00264-010-1143-0
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
6. Greenfield EM. Do genetic susceptibility, Toll-like receptors,
and pathogenassociated molecular patterns modulate the
effects of wear? Clin Orthop Relat Res. (2014) 472:3709–17.
doi: 10.1007/s11999-014-3786-4
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
7. Nich C, Takakubo Y, Pajarinen J, Ainola M, Salem A, Sillat T,
et al. Macrophages-key cells in the response to wear debris
from joint replacements. J Biomed Mater Res A. (2013)
101:3033–45. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.34599
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
8. Drees P, Eckardt A, Gay RE, Gay S, Huber LC. Mechanisms of
disease: molecular insights into aseptic loosening of
orthopedic implants. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. (2007) 3:165–
71. doi: 10.1038/ncprheum0428
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
9. Tkach M, Thery C. Communication by extracellular vesicles:
where we are and where we need to go. Cell. (2016)
164:1226–32. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.043

PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
10. Au Yeung CL, Co NN, Tsuruga T, Yeung TL, Kwan SY, Leung
CS, et al. Exosomal transfer of stroma-derived miR21 confers
paclitaxel resistance in ovarian cancer cells through targeting
APAF1. Nat Commun. (2016) 7:11150. doi: 10.1038/
ncomms11150
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
11. Zhang DY, Wei GH, Li P, Zhou XB, Zhang YY. Urine-derived
stem cells: a novel and versatile progenitor source for cell-
based therapy and regenerative medicine. Genes Dis. (2014)
1:8–7. doi: 10.1016/j.gendis.2014.07.001
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
12. Hu Y, Zhang Y, Ni CY, Chen CY, Rao SS, Yin H, et al. Human
umbilical cord mesenchymal stromal cells-derived
extracellular vesicles exert potent bone protective effects by
CLEC11A-mediated regulation of bone metabolism.
Theranostics. (2020) 10:2293–308. doi: 10.7150/thno.39238
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
13. Chen CY, Du W, Rao SS, Tan YJ, Hu XK, Luo MJ, et al.
Extracellular vesicles from human urine-derived stem cells
inhibit glucocorticoid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral
head by transporting and releasing pro-angiogenic DMBT1
and anti-apoptotic TIMP1. Acta Biomater. (2020) 111:208–20.
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2020.05.020
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
14. Chen CY, Rao SS, Tan YJ, Luo MJ, Hu XK, Yin H, et al.
Extracellular vesicles from human urine-derived stem cells
prevent osteoporosis by transferring CTHRC1 and OPG. Bone
Res. (2019) 7:18. doi: 10.1038/s41413-019-0056-9
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
15. Batrakova EV, Kim MS. Using exosomes, naturally-equipped

nanocarriers, for drug delivery. J Control Release. (2015)
219:396–405. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.07.030
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
16. Lu JM, Wang XW, Marin-Muller C, Wang H, Lin PH, Yao QZ,
et al. Current advances in research and clinical applications of
PLGA-based nanotechnology. Expert. Rev. Mol. Diagn. (2009)
9:325–41. doi: 10.1586/erm.09.15
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text
17. Ilyas A, Islam M, Asghar W, Menon JU, Wadajkar AS, Nguyen
KT, et al. Salt-leaching synthesis of porous PLGA
nanoparticles. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. (2013) 12:1082–8.
doi: 10.1109/TNANO.2013.2279532
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
18. Hines DJ, Kaplan DL. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid-controlled-
release systems: experimental and modeling insights. Crit Rev
Ther Drug Carrier Syst. (2013) 30:257–76. doi: 10.1615/
CritRevTherDrugCarrierSyst.2013006475
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
19. Fang RH, Kroll AV, Gao WW, Zhang L. Cell membrane coating
nanotechnology. Adv Mater. (2018) 30:e1706759. doi:
10.1002/adma.201706759
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
20. Zhou T, Benda C, Dunzinger S, Huang Y, Ho JC, Yang J, et al.
Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells from
urine samples. Nat Protoc. (2012) 7:2080–9. doi: 10.1038/
nprot.2012.115
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
21. Liang HX, Huang K, Su T, Li ZH, Hu SQ, Dinh PU, et al.
Mesenchymal stem cell/red blood cell-inspired nanoparticle
therapy in mice with carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver

failure. ACS Nano. (2018) 12:6536–44. doi: 10.1021/
acsnano.8b00553
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
22. Swanson WB, Gong T, Zhang Z, Eberle M, Niemann D, Dong
RN, et al. Controlled release of odontogenic exosomes from a
biodegradable vehicle mediates dentinogenesis as a novel
biomimetic pulp capping therapy. J Control Release. (2020)
324:679–94. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.06.006
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
23. Ren W, Yang SY, Wooley PH. A novel murine model of
orthopaedic wear-debris associated osteolysis. Scand J
Rheumatol. (2004) 33:349–57. doi:
10.1080/03009740410005944
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
24. Paxton EW, Furnes O, Namba RS, Inacio MC, Fenstad AM,
Havelin LI. Comparison of the norwegian knee arthroplasty
register and a United States arthroplasty registry. J Bone Joint
Surg Am. (2011) 93:20–30. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.K.01045
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
25. Jacobs JJ, Roebuck KA, Archibeck M, Hallab NJ, Glant TT.
Osteolysis: basic science. Clin Orthop Relat Res. (2001)
393:71–7. doi: 10.1097/00003086-200112000-00008
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
26. Zawawi MS, Marino V, Perilli E, Cantley MD, Xu JK, Purdue
PE, et al. Parthenolide reduces empty lacunae and osteoclastic
bone surface resorption induced by polyethylene particles in a
murine calvarial model of peri-implant osteolysis. J Biomed
Mater Res A. (2015) 103:3572–79. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.35484
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
27. Nabeshima A, Pajarinen J, Lin TH, Jiang XY, Gibon E,

Córdova LA, et al. Mutant CCL2 protein coating mitigates
wear particle-induced bone loss in a murine continuous
polyethylene infusion model. Biomaterials. (2017) 117:1–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.11.039
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
28. Ormsby RT, Cantley M, Kogawa M, Solomon LB, Haynes DR,
Findlay DM, et al. Evidence that osteocyte perilacunar
remodelling contributes to polyethylene wear particle
induced osteolysis. Acta Biomater. (2016) 33:242–51. doi:
10.1016/j.actbio.2016.01.016
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
29. Delanois RE, Mistry JB, Gwam CU, Mohamed NS, Choksi US,
Mont MA. Current epidemiology of revision total knee
arthroplasty in the United States. J Arthroplasty. (2017)
32:2663–8. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2017.03.066
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
30. Gwam CU, Mistry JB, Mohamed NS, Thomas M, Bigart KC,
Mont MA, et al. Current epidemiology of revision total hip
arthroplasty in the United States: National inpatient sample
2009 to 2013. J Arthroplasty. (2017) 32:2088–92. doi:
10.1016/j.arth.2017.02.046
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
31. Luo ZW, Li FXZ, Liu YW, Rao SS, Yin H, Huang J, et al.
Aptamer-functionalized exosomes from bone marrow stromal
cells target bone to promote bone regeneration. Nanoscale.
(2019) 11:20884–92. doi: 10.1039/C9NR02791B
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
32. Watson DC, Bayik D, Srivatsan A, Bergamaschi C, Valentin A,
Niu G, et al. Efficient production and enhanced tumor
delivery of engineered extracellular vesicles. Biomaterials.
(2016) 105:195–205. doi: 10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2016.07.003

PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
33. Swanson WB, Zhang Z, Xiu KM, Gong T, Eberle M, Wang ZQ,
et al. Scaffolds with controlled release of pro-mineralization
exosomes to promote craniofacial bone healing without cell
transplantation. Acta Biomater. (2020)b 118:215–32. doi:
10.1016/j.actbio.2020.09.052
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
34. Tao SC, Guo SC, Li M, Ke QF, Guo YP, Zhang CQ. Chitosan
wound dressings incorporating exosomes derived from
microRNA-126-overexpressing synovium mesenchymal stem
cells provide sustained release of exosomes and heal full-
thickness skin defects in a diabetic rat model. Stem Cells
Transl Med. (2017) 6:736–47. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2016-0275
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
35. Wang M, Wang CG, Chen M, Xi YW, Cheng W, Mao C, et al.
Efficient angiogenesis-based diabetic wound healing/skin
reconstruction through bioactive antibacterial adhesive ultra-
violet shielding nanodressing with exosome release. ACS
Nano. (2019) 13:10279–93. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.9b03656
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
36. Hu HX, Dong LL, Bu ZH, Shen YF, Luo J, Zhang H, et al.
miR-23a-3p-abundant small extracellular vesicles released
from Gelma/nanoclay hydrogel for cartilage regeneration. J
Extracell Vesicles. (2020) 9:1778883. doi:
10.1080/20013078.2020.1778883
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
37. Wang CG, Wang M, Xu TZ, Zhang XX, Lin C, Gao WY, et al.
Engineering bioactive self-healing antibacterial exosomes
hydrogel for promoting chronic diabetic wound healing and
complete skin regeneration. Theranostics. (2019) 9:65–76. doi:
10.7150/thno.29766
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

38. Guo Z, Su WL, Zhou RY, Zhang GQ, Yang S, Wu XL, et al.
Exosomal MATN3 of urine-derived stem cells ameliorates
intervertebral disc degeneration by antisenescence effects and
promotes NPC proliferation and ECM synthesis by activating
TGF-β. Oxid Med Cell Longev. (2021) 2021:5542241. doi:
10.1155/2021/5542241
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
39. Xiang HF, Su WL, Wu XL, Chen WJ, Cong WB, Yang S, et al.
Exosomes derived from human urine-derived stem cells
inhibit intervertebral disc degeneration by ameliorating
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Oxid Med Cell Longev. (2020)
2020:6697577. doi: 10.1155/2020/6697577
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
40. Ouyang B, Xie Y, Zhang C, Deng CC, Lv LY, Yao JH, et al.
Extracellular vesicles from human urine-derived stem cells
ameliorate erectile dysfunction in a diabetic rat model by
delivering proangiogenic microRNA. Sex Med. (2019) 7:241–
50. doi: 10.1016/j.esxm.2019.02.001
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
41. Deng CC, Xie Y, Zhang C, Ouyang B, Chen HC, Lv LY, et al.
Urine-derived stem cells facilitate endogenous
spermatogenesis restoration of busulfan-induced non-
obstructive azoospermic mice by paracrine exosomes. Stem
Cells Dev. (2019) 28:1322–33. doi: 10.1089/scd.2019.0026
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
42. Sun YX, Shi H, Yin SQ, Ji C, Zhang X, Zhang B, et al. Human
mesenchymal stem cell derived exosomes alleviate type 2
diabetes mellitus by reversing peripheral insulin resistance
and relieving beta-cell destruction. ACS Nano. (2018)
12:7613–28. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07643
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
43. Armstrong JPK, Holme MN, Stevens M. Re-engineering

extracellular vesicles as smart nanoscale therapeutics. ACS
Nano. (2017) 11:69–83. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.6b07607
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
44. Ferguson SW, Nguyen J. Exosomes as therapeutics: the
implications of molecular composition and exosomal
heterogeneity. J Controlled Release. (2016) 228:179–90. doi:
10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.02.037
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
45. Hong Y, Nam GH, Koh E, Jeon S, Kim GB, Jeong C, et al.
Exosome as a vehicle for delivery of membrane protein
therapeutics, PH20, for enhanced tumor penetration and
antitumor efficacy. Adv Funct Mater. (2018) 28:1703074. doi:
10.1002/adfm.201703074
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
46. Niu W, Guo Y, Xue YM, Chen M, Wang M, Cheng W, et al.
Monodisperse branched molybdenum-based bioactive
nanoparticles significantly promote osteogenic differentiation
of adipose-derived stem cells. Part Part Syst Charact. (2019)
36:1900105. doi: 10.1002/ppsc.201900105
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
47. Tian T, Xie WH, Gao WD, Wang G, Zeng L, Miao GH, et al.
Micro-nano bioactive glass particles incorporated porous
scaffold for promoting osteogenesis and angiogenesis in vitro.
Front Chem. (2019) 7:186. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00186
PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar
Keywords: exosomes, urine-derived stem cells, PLGA microsphere,
nanoparticles, UHMWPE, wear particle-induced osteolysis
Citation: Li H, Hu Y, Zeng M, Yang J, Fan X, Wang Y and Xie J
(2021) Exosomes From Human Urine-Derived Stem Cells
Encapsulated Into PLGA Nanoparticles for Therapy in Mice With

Particulate Polyethylene-Induced Osteolysis. Front. Med. 8:781449.
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.781449
Received: 22 September 2021; Accepted: 17 November 2021;
Published: 06 December 2021.
Edited by:
Bing Yue, Shanghai JiaoTong University, China
Reviewed by:
Xianzhe Liu, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
China
Xuqiang Liu, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
China
Zhang Guoqiang, People's Liberation Army General Hospital, China
Copyright © 2021 Li, Hu, Zeng, Yang, Fan, Wang and Xie. This is
an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these terms.
*Correspondence: Jie Xie, ZHJfeGllamllQDE2My5jb20=
†These authors have contributed equally to this work
Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Download article
•  Download PDF

•  ReadCube
•  EPUB
•  XML
Share on
•
•
•
Export citation
•  EndNote
•  Reference Manager
•  Simple Text file
•  BibTex
4,2K
Total views
1,9K
Downloads
17
Citations
Citation numbers are available from Dimensions
View article impact
View altmetric score
Share on
•
•
•
Edited by
BY
Bing Yue
Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China
Reviewed by
XL

Xuqiang Liu
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, China
ZG
Zhang Guoqiang
People's Liberation Army General Hospital, China
XL
Xianzhe Liu
Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, China
Table of contents
•  Abstract
•  Introduction
•  Materials and Methods
•  Results
•  Discussion
•  Conclusion
•  Data Availability Statement
•  Ethics Statement
•  Author Contributions
•  Funding
•  Conflict of Interest
•  Publisher's Note
•  Supplementary Material
•  References
Export citation
•  EndNote
•  Reference Manager
•  Simple Text file
•  BibTex
[image]
Check for updates
Frontiers' impact
[image]

Articles published with Frontiers have
received 12 million total citations
Your research is the real superpower - learn how we maximise its
impact through our leading community journals
Explore our impact metrics
Supplementary Material
Download article
Download
•  Download PDF
•  ReadCube
•  EPUB
•  XML
•  Guidelines
○  Author guidelines
○  Services for authors
○  Policies and publication ethics
○  Editor guidelines
○  Fee policy
•  Explore
○  Articles
○  Research Topics
○  Journals
○  How we publish
•  Outreach
○  Frontiers Forum
○  Frontiers Policy Labs
○  Frontiers for Young Minds

○  Frontiers Planet Prize
•  Connect
○  Help center
○  Emails and alerts
○  Contact us
○  Submit
○  Career opportunities
Follow us
© 2025 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved
Privacy policy | Terms and conditions