ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Doxorubicin nanobubble for combining ultrasonography
and targeted chemotherapy of rabbit with VX2 liver tumor
Mingming Meng1 & Jie Gao2 & Chongchong Wu3 & Xuan Zhou4 & Xuefeng Zang5 &
Xiangchun Lin1 & Hong Liu1 & Canghai Wang1 & Hui Su1 & Kuiliang Liu1 &
Yadan Wang1 & Xinying Xue6 & Jing Wu1
Received: 12 September 2015 /Accepted: 26 November 2015 /Published online: 6 January 2016
# The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract A new class of multifunctional nanobubble using
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) has been developed as
ultrasound imaging contrast agents, doxorubicin carriers, and
enhancers of ultrasound-mediated drug delivery. The doxoru-
bicin nanobubble (DOX-NB) wrapping carbon tetrafluoride
gas was prepared with double emulsion method. We evaluated
the enhanced ultrasonic function of the DOX-NB in vivo; its
antitumor function was confirmed. The diameter of the pre-
pared bubble was 500 nm, and the potential was −23 mV. The
drug loading and encapsulation efficiency of the bubble were
78.6 and 7.4 %, respectively. Therefore, the DOX-NB greatly
enhanced ultrasound imaging in vivo. Ultrasound combined
with DOX-NB had significant antitumor effect. Compared
with other groups, the tumor growth rate and the proliferation
index were the lowest while the survival rate and apoptosis
index were the highest.
Keywords Ultrasound . Doxorubicin nanobubble
(DOX-NB) . VX2 liver tumor . Treatment
Introduction
The organ toxicity of conventional chemotherapeutic agents
usually leads to relatively low level of drug concentration on
target area of the body, thus limits the clinical use of chemo-
therapeutic drugs. In the past decade, several nanocarriers
have been developed, such as liposomes, which can wrap
the chemotherapeutic agents and reduce the side effects sig-
nificantly. Previous studies showed that the nanodrug carriers
could escape identification by reticuloendothelial system after
surface modification and can keep away from the nontargeted
area. Therefore, the use of nanodrug carrier cycle period has
been extended [1]. Nanodrugs can pass through the endothe-
lial gap of tumor and accumulate in tumor target area passive-
ly. Research has shown that the interval between vascular
endothelial gap in a variety of tumors is between 380 and
780 nm [2, 3], and nanodrug carriers will not accumulate in
normal tissue since normal tissue vascular connects more
tightly with each other. In addition to higher vascular perme-
ability, the lymphatic clearance ability of the tumor tissue is
very poor, which ensures the retention of the nanoparticles in
tumor tissue for a long time.
Ultrasound microbubble contrast agent is composed of gas-
eous core wrapping gas shell such as lipids, surfactants, and
high molecular polymer. Because of the acoustic scattering
properties and incidence ultrasound nonlinear function of
Mingming Meng, Jie Gao and Chongchong Wu contributed equally to
this work. Xinying Xue and Jing Wu are juxtaposed Corresponding
Author.
* Xinying Xue
xinyingxue2010@163.com
* Jing Wu
wujing36@163.com
1
The Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital,
Capital Medical University, 10 Tieyi Road, Yangfang District,
Beijing 100038, China
2
The Department of Pathology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China
3
The Department of Radiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China
4
The Department of Critical Care Medicine, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, China
5
The Department of Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Shijitan Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
6
The Department of Special Medical Treatment, Beijing Shijitan
Hospital, Capital Medical University, 10 Tieyi Road, Yangfang
District, Beijing 100038, China
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680
DOI 10.1007/s13277-015-4525-5

ultrasound microbubble contrast agent, it is used to enhance
ultrasound imaging [4]. Over these years, ultrasound imaging
agents, such as ultrasound microbubble, has been widely used
in clinical application [5–7]. In the last decade, more and more
researchers demonstrated that the microbubble was used as
drug carrier enhanced the delivery of drug and gene extensive-
ly [8–10]. Ultrasound microbubble contrast agent particle size
must be less than 8 μm to get through the pulmonary capil-
laries. Ultrasound microbubble contrast agent can burst to
deliver drug under certain energy ultrasound to realize the
therapeutic effect. Since ultrasound microbubble contrast
agent has low cost and dual role of ultrasound imaging and
ultrasound-mediated therapy [11], it has become a new type of
carrier in the detection and therapy of tumor. Many research
teams are working on the research of ultrasound microbubble
contrast agent imaging and therapeutic capabilities. However,
it also has limitations, such as the cycle period of which is
reduced significantly due to the dispersion of interior gas and
the clearance function of body [12, 13]. In addition, the size of
the microbubble is usually more than 1 μm, which limits its
stay within the vascular system. As a result, it cannot reach the
tumor tissue area to truly achieve tumor imaging and therapy,
thus restricting its tumor target imaging and therapy applica-
tion [14].
In this study, we intended to introduce a new type of
nanobubbles based on poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
polymer wrapping doxorubicin and carbon tetrafluoride gas
that could enhance ultrasound imaging of tumor and improve
ultrasound-mediated therapeutic effect. Its important feature
was to integrate tumor ultrasound imaging, drug delivery,
and tumor targeting. PLGA’s high stability, biodegradability,
and biocompatibility in vivo enabled it a preferable choice for
pharmaceutical carrier material [15–17]. Studies have con-
firmed that the micelles loaded with doxorubicin can be suc-
cessfully released in vitro under vibration effects of certain
energy ultrasound [18]. In this study, we observed the tumor
ultrasound imaging effects and therapeutic properties of load-
ing DOX-NB applied in rabbit VX2 tumor.
Materials and methods
Double emulsion method and vacuum freeze-drying technol-
ogy were used to prepare nanodoxorubicin microbubble con-
trast agent. One hundred milligrams of PLGA was added to
2 ml dichloromethane and stirred until completely dissolved.
Then, 200 μl doxorubicin solution was added and concussion
30 s with sound and vibration analyzer until the solution be-
came white emulsion (W/O microspheres). Of PVA solution
(10 ml), 4 % was poured into the emulsion and dispersed for
5 min with the high-speed omogenizer, and then, 20 ml 2 %
isopropyl alcohol solution was added to evaporate methylene
chloride sufficiently. It was then washed with double-distilled
water and centrifuged (5000 rpm) to collect the microspheres
to obtain nanoparticles loaded with doxorubicin. Place it in a
freeze drier for 48 h, and then, fill it with perfluoropropane gas
to load doxorubicin nanomicrobubble contrast agent. Keep it
in refrigerator under 4 °C.
General feature detection of loaded DOX-NB
Observe morphology of nanoparticle with ordinary optical
microscope and scanning electron microscope. Detect the par-
ticle size and its distribution using Malvern laser particle size
analyzer. Detect Zeta potential using the surface potential
cytometry.
Detection of encapsulation efficiency and drug capacity
of loaded DOX-NB
Five milligrams of loaded doxorubicin nanobubble contrast
agent was dissolved into 2 ml DMSO, making nanobubble
PLGA shell fully dissolved. Then, add PBS, shock 10 min, stop
shaking after seeing water and oil layering. Extract the water
layer, measure its absorbance value, and calculate the encapsula-
tion efficiency and drug loading using the following formulation:
Encapsulation efficiency %
ð
Þ ¼ WN=WD
 100%; drug loading %
ð
Þ
¼ WN=WP  100%
WN is the doxorubicin content contained into the
nanobubble, WD stands for the invested amount of doxorubicin,
and WP is the weight of nanobubble loaded with doxorubicin.
Assessment drug release in vitro of load DOX-NB
In order to assess the in vitro release characteristics of the load-
ed DOX-NB in the ultrasound field, we conducted in vitro drug
release experiments using two groups, i.e., loaded DOX-NB
group and ultrasonic irradiation-loaded DOX-NB group. The
ultrasonic group was irradiated with ultrasonic gene transfect
instrument. The parameters were set as follows: frequency
1 MHz, sound intensity 2 W/cm2, trigger 1 s, interval 1 s, total
2 min. Dissolve 10 mg doxorubicin nanobubble carrier powder
into 5 ml of physiological saline, then put the solution into the
dialysis bag with two ends closed. And then, put the dialysis
bag into stoppered container filled with 100 ml of physiological
saline. After ultrasonic irradiation, the container was placed in a
constant temperature shaker at an oscillation speed of 100 rpm.
Control group followed the same steps with the ultrasound
group while free from ultrasound irradiation. Take 1 ml sample
at 2, 4, 8, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and 72 h, respectively, and save
these samples in refrigerator under 4 °C. Add 1 ml saline after
taking sample every time. Then, test the doxorubicin
8674
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680

concentration in samples at different time points by high-
performance liquid chromatography, calculate the cumulative
release percentage of the loaded doxorubicin nanobubble, and
plot the time-concentration curve.
Preparation of rabbit VX2 xenograft model
Take off tumor-bearing rabbits’ abdominal hairs with 3 %
sodium sulfide and make the rabbit anesthesia with 2 % pen-
tobarbital sodium. Surgical dissect VX2 rabbit liver tumor
mass under sterile conditions. After rinsing several times with
saline, take fresh fish-like organization and cut the tumor into
1-mm3 tumor mass sinking into saline solution. Open abdom-
inal cavity of the anesthesia and abdominal hair removal rab-
bit in a sterile condition, expose the liver, and put the prepared
tumor mass into the left lobe of the liver with ophthalmic
tweezers. Stop bleeding, suture the abdominal skin layer by
layer, and then intramuscular injects of 800,000 IU per animal
penicillin to prevent infection for three consecutive days.
In vivo imaging experiments of doxorubicin-contained
nanobubbles
Take eight tumor-bearing rabbits and divide them into two
groups randomly. The experimental group was treated with
doxorubicin-contained nanobubbles, and the control group
was treated with normal saline and detected by a Philips
iU22 ultrasound diagnostic apparatus, the probe frequency
of which was 7–10 MHz and the mechanical index was 0.1.
Before ultrasound imaging, strip rabbit abdominal hair with
3 % sodium sulfide and then anesthetize the animals through
intramuscular injection of 2 % sodium pentobarbital. Dissolve
100 mg of the contained DOX-NB in 1 ml saline and then
inject it into rabbit by ear vein injection. At the same time,
image the tumor.
In vivo antitumor effect of doxorubicin-contained
nanobubbles
In order to assess the antitumor effect of the ultrasound com-
bined with contained doxorubicin nanobubble in vivo, we
measured the tumor size of 50 tumor-bearing rabbits by two-
dimensional ultrasonography scanning 15 days after VX2 car-
cinoma modeling. Divide the animals into five groups ran-
domly, i.e., control group, doxorubicin group, ultrasound
group, doxorubicin-loaded nanobubble group, and ultrasound
combined with doxorubicin-loaded nanobubble group.
Provide different treatments to groups for the first 16, 18,
and 20 days, respectively. The treatment schedule was as fol-
lows: inject 2 ml of saline by ear vein to the control group,
Fig. 1 a Light microscopy
images of DOX-NB, b scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) im-
ages of DOX-NB, c size distribu-
tion of DOX-NB by dynamic
light scattering (DLS) measure-
ment, and d potential distribution
of DOX-NB by DLS
measurement
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680
8675

inject 2 ml of doxorubicin solution to doxorubicin group, in-
ject 2 ml DOX-NBs to doxorubicin-loaded nanobubble group.
Ultrasound combined with doxorubicin-loaded nanobubble
was not only injected with 2 ml DOX-NBs but was also sur-
face orientation irradiated VX2 tumors under two-
dimensional ultrasound monitoring using ultrasound gene
transfection instrument. Parameters were set as follows: fre-
quency 1 MHz, sound intensity 2 W/cm2, trigger 1 s, interval
1 s, total 2 min.
Therapeutic method of ultrasound group was the same as
the ultrasound combined with doxorubicin group and without
injection of DOX-NB. Tumor volume (V) was calculated ac-
cording to the following equation: V= (L ×S2) / 2. L and S
stood for the maximum and minimum diameter of the tumor,
respectively. Tumor growth curve was plotted based on the
change of the tumor volume. After the observation, four rab-
bits in each group were sacrificed and tumor mass was
stripped. The tumor mass was sliced and fixed with 4 % of
paraformaldehyde. After embedded with paraffin, the expres-
sion of apoptosis and proliferation of cells in tumor tissue was
detected by immunohistochemical assay and the expression of
apoptosis cell was detected by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay, and the
death index and proliferation index were calculated according
to the following formula. The remained rabbits continued to
be observed to death. Record the survival time of each group
to draw KM survival curves, thus comparing the survival ratio
in each group. The study was approved by the Ethics
Committee of Beijing Shijitan Hospital.
Results and discussion
In this study, we observed that the PLGA DOX-NB could
enhance the imaging of tumors under ultrasound and work
as a drug carrier in ultrasound-mediated treatment. The doxo-
rubicin was prepared with double emulsion method.
Doxorubicin was introduced to the reaction medium prior to
PVA. The introduced carbon tetrafluoride gas equipped the
bubble with the characteristics of ultrasound imaging. After
intravenous injection of DOX-NB to tumor-bearing VX2 rab-
bit, ultrasound gene transfect device could emit certain energy
ultrasonic wave to burst the nanobubbles or accelerate drug
release of the nanobubbles, thus enhancing the concentration
of doxorubicin in tumors to achieve the antitumor effect. The
existence of carbon tetrafluoride gas could enhance the preci-
sion of ultrasound imaging and drug release under the two-
dimensional ultrasound monitoring.
We evaluated the size, potential, and surface characteristics
of DOX-NB (Fig. 1). Under scanning electron microscopy,
the highly dispersed nanobubbles were observed to turn into
spherical bubbles. As shown in Fig. 1, the average size of
nanoparticle was 500 nm detected by dynamic scattering as-
say. The size of the nanoparticle was the key factor of whether
it could pass through the endothelial gap in liver. The size of
our nanoparticle was between 380 and 780 nm, ensuring that
the DOX-NB can achieve the tumor tissue for imaging and
treatment through the EPR effect [19–23]. The potential de-
termined the stability of DOX-NB. In this study, the potential
of nanobubbles was −23 mV, which was detected by laser
surface potential, so the nanoparticle was difficult to gather
and had better stability. According to the determination by
high-performance liquid chromatography, the encapsulation
efficiency of the DOX-NB was 78.6 % while the efficiency
of drug loading was 7.4 %. Figure 2 compared the drug release
characteristic of DOX-NB with or without ultrasonic influ-
ence in order to confirm that ultrasound is helpful for the drug
release. The drug release curve showed that the cumulative
drug release rate of doxorubicin under ultrasonic vibration
was faster than DOX-NB alone. About 80 % of doxorubicin
Fig. 3 The time intensity curve of DOX-NB in the VX2 liver tumor
Fig. 4 Tumor growth curve of liver tumor
Fig. 2 The release curve of DOX-NB between ultrasound and no ultra-
sound in vitro
8676
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680

was released in 24 h after ultrasound, while only 60 % of
doxorubicin was released in DOX-NB group. Meanwhile,
we calculated the time for 50 % of doxorubicin to release.
Under the ultrasound, it took 8 h for 50 % doxorubicin to
release while it needed 12 h without ultrasound. Within the
first 12 h, we found that the burst release happened in both
ultrasonic group and control group. The drug release rate of
the two groups was 70 and 50 %, respectively. From 12 to
72 h, the drug release rate was stable. At 72 h, the drug release
rate of ultrasound rate reached 90 % while the control group
was only 70 %. The results confirmed that ultrasound had
controlled release effect for DOX-NB, and doxorubicin nano-
particle could deliver drug targeting at tumor under the mon-
itoring of ultrasound. Some studies also confirmed that the
underlying mechanism of ultrasound triggering release of
drug from doxorubicin nanoparticle was that ultrasound could
accelerate the degradation of PLGA [24].
In the in vivo VX2 liver cancer imaging process, compared
with saline, DOX-NB could enhance the ultrasonic imaging
significantly in tumor area. After the ear vein injection of
DOX-NB, the nanobubbles could quickly attain the tumor
area and reach the peak after 17 s (Fig. 3). This result con-
firmed that DOX-NB could be used to enhance ultrasound
imaging in clinic and release drug to the targeted tissue under
the two-dimensional ultrasound monitoring.
Fifteen days after planting VX2 tumor cells into rabbits,
tumor was successfully inoculated in the left lobe of the liver
and the diameters of all tumors were more than 10 mm.
According to the tumor growth curve (Fig. 4), the tumor
growth rate was the fastest in control group and the ultrasound
group while the rate was the slowest in the ultrasound com-
bined with DOX-NB group. Compared with the control
group, the inhibitory rate of ultrasound combined with
DOX-NB group is 76.7 %, doxorubicin-loaded nanobubble
Fig. 5 The different expression
of PCNA in each group using
immunohistochemical staining. a
Control group, b US group, c
DOX group, d DOX-NB, and e
DOX-NB + US group
Fig. 6 The proliferation index of each group VX2 liver tumor cell
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680
8677

group is 57.4 %, doxorubicin group is 45.3 %, and ultrasound
group is 15 %. After anticancer treatment, tumor volume in
ultrasound combined with DOX-NB group was significantly
smaller than the other groups, while the tumor volume inhibi-
tion rate was the highest among three groups. The tumor
growth in both doxorubicin group and ultrasound combined
with DOX-NB group was suppressed. However, the inhibito-
ry rate in ultrasound combined with DOX-NB group was
higher than the nanobubble group. These findings confirmed
that the tumor therapeutic effect of doxorubicin nanobubble
was poor without the effect of ultrasound. The possible reason
may be the low drug release rate in tumor area, thus leading to
low level of doxorubicin concentration in tumor area. Both
doxorubicin group and doxorubicin nanobubble group had
Fig. 7 Cell apoptosis in each
group VX2 liver tumor by
TUNEL. a Control group, b US
group, c DOX group, d DOX-
NB, and e DOX-NB + US group
Fig. 8 Apoptotic index of VX2 liver tumor cells in each group
Fig. 9 KM survival curves of VX2 liver tumor cells in each group
8678
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680

suppressive effect to tumor, but the inhibitory effect of doxo-
rubicin nanobubble group was better than doxorubicin group.
Based on this result, we could infer that doxorubicin had in-
tensive toxic side effects to the body after intravenous injec-
tion, which results in poor therapeutic effect. However, load-
ing the doxorubicin into PLGA could reduce its toxicity to the
body significantly, thus improving the tumor therapeutic ef-
fect to a certain extent. Immunohistochemistry results showed
that proliferation cells were observed in all groups and apo-
ptosis and proliferation index in ultrasound combined with
DOX-NB group were lower than other groups (Fig. 5). The
proliferation index was significantly different between each
group (Fig. 6). TUNEL showed that there were apoptosis cells
in tumor area in all groups and the apoptosis index in ultra-
sound combined nanobubble group was the highest (Fig. 7).
The apoptotic index was significantly different as well
(Fig. 8). The survival curves of each group showed that the
survival rate in ultrasound combined nanobubble group was
obviously higher than other groups (Fig. 9). Since the apopto-
sis index negatively correlated to the degree of tumor growth
and the proliferation index positively correlated to the degree
of tumor growth, the above results confirmed that the ultra-
sound combined with DOX-NB could significantly improve
the anticancer therapeutic effect.
In summary, we fabricated DOX-NB based on PLGA com-
posites successfully. Doxorubicin nanobubble can be used as
ultrasound contrast agent to enhance tissue imaging.
Meanwhile, its application can suppress VX2 tumor growth
significantly in vivo. Therefore, DOX-NB has great potential
in tumor therapy mediated by two-dimensional ultrasound and
provides a new insight for tumor imaging and therapy.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the fund of Beijing
outstanding young backbone. Project number is 2014000021469G253.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflicts of interest
None
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1.
Bekeredjian R, Chen S, Frenkel PA, Grayburn PA, Shohet RV.
Ultrasound-targeted microbubble destruction can repeatedly direct
highly specific plasmid expression to the heart. Circulation.
2003;108:1022–6.
2.
Burns PN, Wilson SR, Simpson DH. Pulse inversion imaging of
liver blood flow: improved method for characterizing focal masses
with microbubble contrast. Investig Radiol. 2000;35:58–71.
3.
Campbell RB. Tumor physiology and delivery of
nanopharmaceuticals. Anticancer Agents in Med Chem. 2006;6:
503–12.
4.
Eisenbrey JR, Burstein OM, Kambhampati R, Forsberg F, Liu JB,
Wheatley MA. Development and optimization of a doxorubicin
loaded poly(lactic acid) contrast agent for ultrasound directed drug
delivery. J Control Release. 2010;143:38–44.
5.
El-Sherif DM, Lathia JD, Le NT, Wheatley MA. Ultrasound deg-
radation of novel polymer contrast agents. J Biomed Mater Res A.
2004;68:71–8.
6.
Greish K. Enhanced permeability and retention of macromolecular
drugs in solid tumors: a royal gate for targeted anticancer
nanomedicines. J Drug Target. 2007;15:457–64.
7.
Hobbs SK, Monsky WL, Yuan F, Roberts WG, Griffith L, Torchilin
VP, et al. Regulation of transport pathways in tumor vessels: role of
tumor type and microenvironment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1998;95:4607–12.
8.
Hoff L. Acoustic properties of ultrasonic contrast agents.
Ultrasonics. 1999;34:591–3.
9.
Iyer AK, Khaled G, Fang J, Maeda H. Exploiting the enhanced
permeability and retention effect for tumor targeting. Drug Discov
Today. 2006;11:812–8.
10.
Jain RA. The manufacturing techniques of various drug loaded
biodegradable poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) devices.
Biomaterials. 2000;21:2475–90.
11.
Kabalnov A, Bradley J, Flaim S, Klein D, Pelura T, Peters B, et al.
Dissolution of multicomponent microbubbles in the bloodstream: 2.
Experiment. Ultrasound Med Biol. 1998;24:751–60.
12.
Kabalnov A, Klein D, Pelura T, Schutt E, Weers J. Dissolution of
multicomponent microbubbles in the bloodstream: 1. Theory.
Ultrasound Med Biol. 1998;24:739–49.
13.
Klibanov AL. Microbubble contrast agents: targeted ultrasound im-
aging and ultrasound-assisted drug-delivery applications. Investig
Radiol. 2006;41:354–62.
14.
Lawrie A, Brisken AF, Francis SE, Cumberland DC, Crossman DC,
Newman CM. Microbubble-enhanced ultrasound for vascular gene
delivery. Gene Ther. 2000;7:2023–7.
15.
Lindner JR. Microbubbles in medical imaging: current applications
and future directions. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004;3:527–32.
16.
Lindner JR, Song J, Xu F, Klibanov AL, Singbartl K, Ley K, et al.
Noninvasive ultrasound imaging of inflammation using
microbubbles targeted to activated leukocytes. Circulation.
2000;102:2745–50.
17.
Matsumura Y, Maeda H. A new concept for macromolecular ther-
apeutics in cancer chemotherapy: mechanism of tumoritropic accu-
mulation of proteins and the antitumor agent smancs. Cancer Res.
1986;46:6387–92.
18.
Price RJ, Skyba DM, Kaul S, Skalak TC. Delivery of colloidal
particles and red blood cells to tissue through microvessel ruptures
created by targeted microbubble destruction with ultrasound.
Circulation. 1998;98:1264–7.
19.
Ravi Kumar MN, Bakowsky U, Lehr CM. Preparation and charac-
terization of cationic PLGA nanospheres as DNA carriers.
Biomaterials. 2004;25:1771–7.
20.
Roberts WG, Palade GE. Neovasculature induced by vascular en-
dothelial growth factor is fenestrated. Cancer Res. 1997;57:765–72.
21.
Wilson K, Homan K, Emelianov S. Biomedical photoacoustics
beyond thermal expansion using triggered nanodroplet vaporiza-
tion for contrast-enhanced imaging. Nat Commun. 2012;3:618.
22.
Fang J, Nakamura H, Maeda H. The EPR effect: unique features of
tumor blood vessels for drug delivery, factors involved, and limita-
tions and augmentation of the effect[J]. Adv Drug Deliv Rev.
2011;63(3):136–51.
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680
8679

23.
Acharya S, Sahoo SK. PLGA nanoparticles containing various an-
ticancer agents and tumour delivery by EPR effect[J]. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev. 2011;63(3):170–83.
24.
Yoo HS, Oh JE, Lee KH, Park TG. Biodegradable nanoparticles
containing doxorubicin-PLGA conjugate for sustained release.
Pharm Res. 1999;16:1114–8.
8680
Tumor Biol. (2016) 37:8673–8680