Unveiling the therapeutic
potential of cabozantinib-loaded
poly D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid
and polysarcosine nanoparticles
in inducing apoptosis and
cytotoxicity in human HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma cell
lines and in vivo anti-tumor
activity in SCID female mice
Sankha Bhattacharya
1*†, Vipan Kumar Parihar 2
and Bhupendra G. Prajapati 3
1Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy & Technology Management, SVKM’S NMIMS
Deemed-to-be University, Shirpur, Maharashtra, India, 2Department of Regulatory Toxicology, National
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Industrial Area, Hajipur, Bihar, India,
3Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Shree S.K. Patel College of Pharmaceutical Education &
Research Ganpat University, Mehsana, Gujarat, India
Introduction: The study aimed to develop a nano-based drug delivery system for
the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a type of liver cancer that
accounts for 90% of all liver malignancies. The study focused on the use of
cabozantinib (CNB), a potent multikinase inhibitor that targets the VEGF receptor
2, as the chemotherapeutic drug. We developed CNB-loaded nanoparticles made
from Poly D, L-lactic-co-glycolic acid, and Polysarcosine (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs)
for use in human HepG2 cell lines.
Methods: By O/W solvent evaporation method, the polymeric nanoparticles were
prepared. The various techniques, such as photon correlation spectroscopy,
scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy were
used, to determine the formulation's particle size, zeta potential, and
morphology. SYBR Green/ROX qPCR Master Mix and RT-PCR equipment used
to measure liver cancer cell line and tissue mRNA expression and MTT assay to test
HepG2 cell cytotoxicity. Cell cycle arrest analysis, annexin V assay, and ZE5 Cell
Analyzer apoptosis assay were also performed.
Results: The results of the study showed that the particle diameters were 192.0 ±
3.67 nm with 0.128 PDI and -24.18 ± 3.34 mV zeta potential. The antiproliferative
and proapoptotic effects of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs were evaluated using MTT and
ﬂow cytometry (FCM). The IC50 value of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs was 45.67 µg/mL,
34.73 µg/mL, and 21.56 µg/mL for 24, 48, and 72 h, respectively. The study also
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
01
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Zhigang Ren,
First Afﬁliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, China
REVIEWED BY
Xingang Guan,
Taizhou University, China
Weifeng Ding,
Nantong University, China
Liang He,
University of California, San Francisco, CA,
United States
*CORRESPONDENCE
Sankha Bhattacharya
sankhabhatt@gmail.com
†PRESENT ADDRESS
Sankha Bhattacharya,
School of Pharmacy &Technology
Management Shirpur, SVKM’S NMIMS
Deemed-to-be University, Shirpur,
Maharashtra, India
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Pharmacology of Anti-Cancer Drugs,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Oncology
RECEIVED 22 December 2022
ACCEPTED 31 January 2023
PUBLISHED 15 February 2023
CITATION
Bhattacharya S, Parihar VK and Prajapati BG
(2023) Unveiling the therapeutic potential
of cabozantinib-loaded poly D,L-lactic-co-
glycolic acid and polysarcosine
nanoparticles in inducing apoptosis and
cytotoxicity in human HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines and in
vivo anti-tumor activity in SCID
female mice.
Front. Oncol. 13:1125857.
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Bhattacharya, Parihar and Prajapati.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 15 February 2023
DOI 10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857

found that 11.20% and 36.77% of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs-treated cells were
apoptotic at 60 µg/mL and 80 µg/mL, respectively, suggesting that the
nanoparticles were effective in inducing apoptosis in the cancer cells. It can also
conclude that, CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs inhibit human HepG2 hepatocellular
carcinoma cells and kill them by upregulating the tumour suppressor genes
MT1F, MT1X, and downregulating MTTP, APOA4. Further in vivo antitumor
activity was well reported in SCID female mice.
Discussion: Overall, this study suggests that the CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs are a
promising drug delivery system for the treatment of HCC, and further research is
needed to investigate their potential in clinical treatment.
KEYWORDS
cabozantinib, polysarcosine, HepG2, ﬂow cytometry, annexin V staining,
apoptosis analysis
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
1 Introduction
It was often seen that when the same kind of chemotherapeutic
drugs (like cytarabine, imatinib, Taxol derivatives, etc.) was used over
and over again, their effectiveness was limited, and they caused some
unwanted side effects in cancer patients (1–3). To solve this problem,
individuals need to work with a different set of molecules. On January
14, 2019, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United
States gave its approval for Cabozantinib to treat hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) (4, 5). Cabozantinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(RTK); which is often seen overexpressed in the outer layer of the
cancerous tissues. From recent studies, it was conﬁrmed that
Cabozantinib speciﬁcally targets endothelial growth factor receptor
types 1 (VEGFR-1) (6), endothelial growth factor receptor types 2
(VEGFR-2) (7), FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT-3) (8); which
ultimately results in the demotion of angiogenesis and proliferation
of malignant tumour (9, 10). As far as liver cancer is concerned (11), it
is the sixth most frequently recognized cancer and the fourth leading
cause of cancer mortality across the globe (12, 13). As per the WHO
report, nearly 782,000 deaths have been recorded due to liver cancer,
and surprisingly, liver cancer is more common in men than in women.
The most commonly available treatment for liver cancer is surgery and
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
02

chemotherapy (14). But due to a lack of higher toxicity and lower
efﬁcacy, the speciﬁc chemotherapeutic drug cannot be administered as
such. Therefore, a strong and controlled drug delivery is required to
reduce all the associated problems related to chemotherapeutic
medicaments (15, 16). The possible ameliorate approach could be the
drug-encapsulated polymeric nanoparticular approach (17); which
could improve the effectiveness of encapsulation, the drug’s
sustainability, and enhance intercellular penetration.
In this study, a new type of non-ionic hydrophilic polypeptide
called poly (n-methylated glycine) (18, 19) or Polysarcosine (PSar) was
used in the delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs by polymeric
nanoparticles; which is the best alternative to corona-forming
polymer, poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) (20). Apart from PSar, the
Poly D, L-lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) (21) was also used; due to
its excellent biodegradability and biocompatibility properties it is an
excellent choice for drug delivery. Therefore, an attempt was made to
combine PLGA-PSar nanoparticles encapsulated with Cabozantinib
(22, 23) (CNB) with a particle size of<200nm; which ultimately helps in
to overcome reticuloendothelial opsonization. In my previous study,
“Authors (2021)”; it was observed that Docetaxel loaded Psar-PLGA-
NPs could be effective against various human cancer cell lines (U-87
MG, HeLa. C2BBe1, HCT-116, NCI–N87, NCI–H929-Luc-mCh-Puro)
and subsequently enhances the blood circulation time (24, 25). As per
Blerina Shkodra et al. (26) studies, PLGA-DY-635 (BIM-I)
nanoparticles (20-70nm) were prepared; which was comprising with
Protein Kinase C Inhibitor; Bisindolylmaleimide (26). The prepared
nanoparticles have an effective role in selective liver cancer due to their
higher cellular uptake and excellent internalization. Surprisingly, no
research has been done on the development of polymer PLGA-PSar-
NPs even though the antitumor activities of CNB are increasingly being
observed through pharmacological means. In this article, we postulate
by ﬁndings that modiﬁed CNB polymeric nanoparticles might be used
as a novel drug delivery system for cancer therapy. Another goal of this
research is to use a ﬂow cytometry assay to measure the apoptosis of the
HepG2 cell line after it has been treated with nanoparticles. Further,
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was done to
check for certain gene changes and ﬁnd a small number of cancerous
cells.Nevertheless, lactate dehydrogenase assay, pharmacokinetic
studies, tissue distribution studies, in vivo cancer activity in SCID
female mice, and immunohistochemistry were performed to conﬁrm
the biocompatibility, biodistribution, and anti-tumor activity of the
prepared CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs nanoparticles. Therefore, CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs nanoparticles were formed and tested for the ﬁrst
time in this study against the human HepG2 liver cancer cell line and
SCID female mice.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Materials
Cabozantinib was a gift sample obtained from Neon Laboratories
Ltd, Mumbai, India. Poly D, L-lactide, glycolide, polysarcosine, 2-ethyl
hexanoate, methylene chloride, and diethyl ether was purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich, Bengaluru, India. Dichloromethane, methanol,
polyvinyl alcohol, and d-trehalose was purchased from Sd Fine-
Chem Limited, Mumbai, India. Spectra Por S/P 2 Dialysis Membrane
was a gift sample from Cole-Parmer®, Mumbai, India. From National
Centre For Cell Science, Pune, India hepatocellular carcinoma cell line
(HepG2) was obtained. Further, Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium
(DMEM), Hepatocyte Culture Medium (HHCM), Fetal bovine serum
(FBS), tetrazolium salt and propidium iodide (PI), tetrazolium salt (3-
(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), 4’,
6 diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), was
purchased from HiMedia Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Mumbai, India.
2.2 Synthesis of PLGA-PSar
While performing the synthesis of Poly D, L-lactic-co-glycolic
acid (PLGA), and Polysarcosine (PSar), the ring-opening reaction was
considered (27). At 10 mmHg vacuum pressure and at 160°C, the
PSar was dried in at stainless steel container. To enhance the synthesis
process, 1.34 g of poly D, L-lactide, and 0.110 g of glycolide were
added to PSar (1.25g). In vacuumed condition, the drying process was
extended up to 45min, maintaining 160°C. To enhance the reaction,
0.10 g of 2-ethyl hexanoate was added as a catalyst, and further, the
reaction was extended up to 6 hours. The resultant copolymer was
dissolved in methylene chloride solution, and the solution was ice
cold in diethyl ether. The gained product was dried using IKA RV3 V-
C Rotary Evaporator; USA.
2.3 Preparations of PLGA-PSar-encapsulated
cabozantinib nanoparticles
By O/W solvent evaporation method, the polymeric nanoparticles
were prepared. In this process, 20 mg of Cabozantinib and 200 mg of
PLGA-PSar copolymers were dissolved in a binary mixture of
dichloromethane-methanol (8:2). The mixture was further added
into ice-cool water containing 1% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), the
resultant mixture was probe sonicated using AI001-Probe Sonicator
650W (Quick lab, India) for 60 seconds for eight times at 50%
amplitude, which ultimately results in the formation of O/W
emulsion. To remove unentrapped drug, the colloidal
nanoemulsion was further centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 20 min
and washed three times with double distilled water. After
lyophilization (28) of the resultant dried nanoparticles using 2.5%
w/w D-Trehalose at -85°C, the polymeric nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs) were stored at -20°C for further use.
2.4 Size distribution and zeta potential study
The prepared nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs) were
measured using DelsaNano C (Beckman Coulter, USA) for particle
size, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential (29–31). Photon
correlation spectroscopy is the name of the fundamental concept
behind this instrument. When an electric ﬁeld is applied, particles or
colloidal solutions emit laser light, which can be measured using this
instrument. DelsaNano C can measure particles up to 7 m in diameter
and even tiny molecules as small as 267 D in concentrations ranging
from 0.001% to 40%. This experiment set the laser weave length to
658 nm at 30 mW. The DelsaNano C can detect zeta potentials
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
03

between -100mV and +100mV for the sample. The emulsion of the
nanoparticles was diluted with 0.50 mL of double distilled water and
0.50 mL of pH 7.4 phosphate buffer solution separately and vortexed
for 2 minutes to prevent bubbling. The particle size, zeta potential and
PDI were measured at 25°C.
2.5 NPs morphology
To determine the morphology of the prepared polymeric
nanoparticles, scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi High
Technology, SU9000, Japan) was performed (32). With greater
stability and instrument resolution at 0.4 nm and 30kV to 1.4 nm
and 1kV, 100μL of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs were diluted with double-
distilled water, and the resulting minuscule quantity was put onto cover
slide and dried at room temperature. Using a glass sputter coater, the
resultant ﬁlm was coated with gold under speciﬁc vacuumed conditions
and scanned under SEM (Carl Zeiss Evo 10 Scanning Electron
Microscope). To get proper magniﬁcent images, transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) (33) was performed under TEM (Hitachi
7500, Japan). Before performing TEM, the nanoparticles were coated
with carbon and placed in Phosphotungstic acid (1%) stained copper
grid. The software-generated digital micrograph interprets the evolved
images from TEM studies. Atomic force microscopes (AFM) help us
learn more about the shape of the CNB-PLGA-PSar-surface (34). The
AFM study (AFM5300E, Hitachi) was performed in semiconductor
mode and elevated vacuumed condition. During the AFM operation,
the AFM prob mobilized in width and lengthwise. The AFM can detect
samples within the range of -120°C to 800°C. While operating AFM
studies, CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs suspension was placed in a microscopic
slide until the ﬁlm formed. The kurtosis, average roughness, and
average height were calculated for the nanoparticles, and 3D & 2D
images were generated for further analysis.
2.6 Physical characterization
To determine speciﬁc functional groups in Cabozantinib (CAB),
free copolymer (PLGA-PSar), and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs, the FTIR
spectroscopy (Perkin-Elmer, USA) (35) were performed in the
frequency range of 400-4000cm-1. In order to detect the physical
nature of the drug after encapsulation within nanoparticles,
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) studies were performed
using DSC 4000 System, 100-240V/50-60Hz (Perkin-Elmer, USA).
The samples were scanned, maintaining the temperature range at 25-
400°C at a ﬂow rate of 10°C/min. To determine Cabozantinib (CAB),
free copolymer (PLGA-PSar), and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs thermal
stability, Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (TA SDT Q600) (36)
was performed. At an inert nitrogen environment at 30-500°C and
15°C/min heating rate, the TGA analysis was performed. In respect of
temperature, the percentage weight loss has been calculated. To
determine the structure of crystalline materials and chemical
composition information, XRD studies were performed using
Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer at CuKa monochromatic
radiation and X-ray source of 40kv and 40mA. With the increment
of 0.02°and 2s at each step, at 2q, the diffractograms were recorded
between 20° to 70°.
2.7 Encapsulation efﬁciency
The nanoparticles suspension was placed in a centrifuge and run
for 25 min at 10,000 rpm. The obtained nanoparticles were placed in
5mL ethanol for 3h. From the calibration curve, the amount of
encapsulated Cabozantinib (CAB) was determined by LAMBDA
XLS+ Spectrometer (PerkinElmer Fremont, CA, USA) at 245nm.
Percentage drug loading and percentage encapsulation efﬁciency (%)
were calculated from the following equation:
Encapsulation efficiency( % )
= The amount of CAB in encapsulated CAB −PLGA −PSar −NPs
 Intial amount of CAB used 
   100
(1)
Drug loading( % )
=
The   amount   of   total   loaded   CAB  
The total amount of CAB encapsulated nanoparticles (CAB −PLGA −PSar −NPs) X   100
(2)
After performing three individual experiments, the mean value
was calculated (Mean ± SD)
2.8 In vitro drug release studies and drug
deposition studies in dialysis membrane
For In vitro drug release studies, Spectra Por S/P 2 Dialysis
Membrane (37), 12,000-14,000Dalton 25mm was used. The
overnight soaked dialysis membrane in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer
solution was tied on dialysis tubes and ﬁlled with CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs suspension comprising 10 mg of Cabozantinib (CAB).
After being tied on two sides, the dialysis membrane was placed in
200mL pH 7.4 phosphate buffer solution and kept in sink condition,
maintaining the temperature at 37 ± 2°C and 50rpm rotation speed.
At speciﬁc time intervals, aliquots of the solution have been
withdrawn from the donner compartment and replaced with the
same amount of fresh pH 7.4 phosphate buffer solution. By compact
UV-2600/2700 UV-Visible spectrophotometer, Shimadzu at 245nm,
the samples were analyzed. Experiments were performed three times.
The same additional process was carried out once more for the
evaluation using a pH 5.0 phosphate buffer solution.
Further, various kinetics studies, i.e., zero order, ﬁrst order,
Higuchi, Korsmeyer Peppas model, were performed and concluded
that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs follow zero-order kinetics. For drug
deposition studies in the dialysis membrane, after drug release and
diffusion studies, the dialysis membrane was carefully removed and
carefully swabbed using pH 7.4 phosphate buffer; three times, the
procedure was repeated to ensure no trace of residual particles left
onto the diffusion membrane. Further, the dialysis membrane was
chopped and entreated in methanol for 48 hr, and the resultant
mixture was centrifuged at 50,0000 rpm using Sorvall WX 80
Ultracentrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The obtained
supernatant was analyzed using a compact UV-2600/2700 UV-
Visible spectrophotometer, Shimadzu, at 245nm. A standard
calibration curve estimated the amount of deposited drug within
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
04

the dialysis membrane. The purpose of this study was to mimic
human epithelial tissue layers.
2.9 In vitro cytotoxicity assays
For performing in vitro cytotoxicity studies, a hepatocellular
carcinoma cell line (HepG2) (38, 39) was used. In the presence of a
5% CO2 atmosphere, 100 mg/mL streptomycin, and 100 units/mL
penicillin, the cells were cultured in a DMEM medium in the presence
of a 10% phosphate buffer solution (40). The resultant cells were
seeded in 96-well plates in the presence of 100 mL culture medium and
kept for 24 hr. Further, the cells were treated with native Cabozantinib
(CAB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs for 24, 48, and 72hr. The culture
media was further replaced with Human Hepatocyte Culture Medium
(HHCM) (100 mL), which was included with 2% Fetal bovine serum
(FBS) and 0.5 mg/mL of yellow tetrazolium salt (3-(4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, or MTT
reagent (41). The temperature was maintained around 37°C during
4hr of incubation. After incubation, the resultant supernatant was
replaced with Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). By using a Bio-Rad model
680 microplate reader, absorbance was recorded at 570nm after
30min. The assay was performed in triplicate form.
2.10 Apoptotic nuclei measurement using
DAPI staining
To investigate internalization and to check changes of nuclei
apoptosis, DAPI staining and ﬂuorescence microscopy was
performed (42). The selective cell line (HepG2) (1.1 × 104 cells/
well) were cultured in 6 well plates and the ﬁxing process extended up
to 24hrs.Further HepG2 cells were treated with Cabozantinib (CAB)
and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs for 24h. Using formaldehyde (4%) and 2%
phosphate buffer solution, the cells were washed and ﬁxed. By
utilizing Triton-X (0.2%) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) (3mg/mL in 2% phosphate buffer solution), the
permeabilization and straining of cells were achieved.
2.11 Cell cycle arrest analysis
For cell cycle analysis, propidium iodide (PI) (43) staining was
used to analyze DNA content in a different phase of the cell cycle. In
the presence of 10% phosphate buffer solution, penicillin-
streptomycin (1%), the HepG2 cells (5 ×104 cells) were seeded in
12 well plates ﬁlled with Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
1640 medium and 15% Fetal bovine serum (FBS) albumin. After 24hr
of incubation, the cells were treated with Cabozantinib (CAB) and
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. The addition of trypsin solution and 70%
ethanol would help in trypsinization and the ﬁxation of cells. After 72
hrs, the ﬁxed cells were injected with propidium iodide (PI)and
ribonuclease A for 45 min. The cells were further analyzed using a
ZE5 Cell Analyzer and 5 lasers (BIO-RAD, USA). The cell fractions of
different cell phases were analyzed at 6 ×104 events. All the
experiments were performed in triplicate.
2.12 Annexin V staining apoptosis analysis
To determine apoptotic and necrotic cells, annexin V assay was
used (44). At speciﬁc IC50 value of free Cabozantinib (CAB) and
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs, the cells were treated (3×105 cells/well) in 6-
well plates. After 48hr, the cells were washed and re-suspended in
1000μL of phosphate buffer solution. In this cell-suspended solution,
annexin V-FITC (10 mL) and PI staining solution (10 mL) were added
at 25°C and in a dark environment, the incubation process was
continued for 10 min; the ﬂow cytometric analysis was performed by
considering Annexin V-FITC Apoptosis Staining/Detection Kit
(ab14085). The data was entreated by BD Accuri C6 Plus Software.
2.13 Real-time reverse transcription
PCR assay
RT-PCR (real-time-reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction) is a laboratory technique used to detect and quantify
speciﬁc genes or gene expression in a sample (45). Cabozantinib is
a small molecule inhibitor of tyrosine kinases, including MET and
VEGFR2. It has been shown to have anti-tumor activity in various
cancer types, including renal cell carcinoma and liver cancer (46). The
mechanism of action in RT-PCR experiments is likely related to its
inhibition of these kinases, leading to decreased tumor cell
proliferation and angiogenesis. Additionally, cabozantinib has been
shown to have a direct effect on the tumor microenvironment
through the inhibition of ﬁbroblast activation and collagen
production, which can also contribute to its anti-tumor activity. In
RT-PCR experiments on HepG2 cells (a human liver cancer cell line),
when treated with Cabozantinib, it is likely that researchers would
observe decreased expression of genes associated with tumor cell
proliferation and angiogenesis, such as VEGFR2 and MET. The
inhibition of these kinases is the primary mechanism of action for
Cabozantinib in cancer cells.When Cabozantinib is encapsulated in
poly lactic co glycolic acid (PLGA) and polysarcosin nanoparticles,
the drug is delivered in a targeted manner to the cancer cells, resulting
in increased efﬁcacy and reduced toxicity (47). The exact mechanism
of cabozantinib in respect of RT-PCR is not well understood, but it is
likely that the drug works by inhibiting the activity of the kinases that
are involved in the regulation of gene expression and cell
proliferation. Researchers may observe an improved therapeutic
effect of Cabozantinib on HepG2 cells when delivered via PLGA
and polysarcosin nanoparticles, as compared to non-encapsulated
Cabozantinib. The HepG2 cells were seeded at 5×105cells/well and
further incubated for 24hr at 37°C and in the presence of 5% CO2. In
the next step, Cabozantinib (CAB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs in
varying concentrations were introduced in the media. After 24hr of
incubation, the enthusiast cells were collected, and RNA was
separated by Trizol reagent. The RNA was extracted using
NanoDrop (45) spectrophotometer at 280nm. For the extraction of
RNA, agarose gel (2%) in TBE buffer (1X) was required. A nucleic
acid stain called SYBR Safe (Wilmington, De, USA) was utilized for
proper visualization of the cells. The SuperScript First-Strand
Synthesis System was utilized to synthesize the process of cDNA.
The process has been investigated by Real-Time PCR (qPCR) kit
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
05

(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) with 1μg RNA. By instrumenting
SYBR Green/ROX qPCR Master Mix (48, 49), the mRNA expression
was evaluated. The row data were normalized according to 2-delta Ct in
the presence of b-actin; a housekeeping gene.
2.14 Evaluation of erythrocyte membrane
integrity by lactate dehydrogenase
Erythrocytes produce lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), which may
be measured photometrically using the LDH test kit/Lactate
Dehydrogenase Assay Kit (Colorimetric) (ab102526) (50). For the
LDH investigation, blood was obtained from the neighbouring blood
bank. The erythrocyte suspension was made according to the
methodology described in our earlier research. In 1mL of
erythrocyte solution was treated with speciﬁc amount of
Cabozantinib (CNB), PLGA-PSar-encapsulated Cabozantinib
nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs), and placebo (PLGA-PSar-
NPs) (51). Positive control sample was created by diluting
erythrocyte suspension with 1% Triton-X-100, whereas negative
control sample was created by diluting erythrocyte suspension with
normal saline solution. LDH was generated spontaneously by
incubating 150/UL Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) with erythrocyte
suspension at 37°C. During speciﬁc time intervals, such as 2h, 4h, and
8h after suspension, 400μL samples were taken and centrifuged for 20
minutes at 1345xg. LDH was detected at 500nm after a ready-to-use
LDH solution was added to the supernatant. The total of LDH was
calculated using the following formula.
Lactate dehydrogenase (U=L Þ  ¼ Asample−A   negative   control
A   standard  
150
Where, A
sample stands for Cabozantinib, PLGA-PSar-
encapsulated Cabozantinib nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs)
incubated erythrocytes absorbance, A
negative control indicates,
erythrocytes absorbance of sample, which was pre-treated with
normal saline solution. The A standard indicates the absorbance of
erythrocytes sustention, which were pre-treated with 150/UL Lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) enzyme. The experiment was conducted in
triplicate, and the results are presented as mean standard deviation
(n=3). The RBC survival rate after nanoparticle injection is dependent
on the erythrocyte membrane integrity test. Yuanyuan Guo et al. (52)
created poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) nanoplatforms for
cancer immunotherapy with erythrocyte membrane encapsulation.
With these formulations, cellular absorption in vitro was reportedly
enhanced (52).
2.15 In-Vivo anti-tumour efﬁcacy study
The SCID female mice of 8–10 weeks old were used in the in vivo
effectiveness study (53). SCID stands for severe combined
immunodeﬁciency disorder. Mice were housed in individually
ventilated cages with pelleted food, a 12-hour/12-hour dark-light
cycle, and unrestricted access to water (supplied ad libitum) in a
climate-controlled setting with a temperature range of 25°C ± 3°C.
The National Institutes of Health’s guidelines for the care and use of
animals were followed when conducting all animal experiments,
which included those at Animal House of SPTM, NMIMS, Shirpur,
Maharashtra, India. These facilities also complied with CPCSEA
(Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of
Experiments on Animals) regulations. Mice were subcutaneously
injected with cultured HePG2 cells (5x106 cells) in 200μL of RPMI
1640 with 33% Corning Matrigel Basement Membrane Matrix
(Sigma-Aldrich, India). When xenograft tumour volumes reached
150mm3 (group mean), as instructed by the experimental protocols,
the following treatments were given to mice in four groups (n=6):
saline, Cabozantinib (CNB) (20 mg/kg), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs (20
mg/kg) once weekly (QW) through lateral tailvein. A digital electronic
calliper was used to measure the tumor’s size twice a week. To assess
toxicity, body weight was monitored twice weekly. Tumour volume
was calculated as (width2 length/2).
2.15.1 Scariﬁcation and tumour bulb
of liver dissection
The SCID female mice were given thiopental anaesthesia prior to
being killed by cervical dislocation. Before being implanted in parafﬁn
wax, liver tissues and tumour bulbs from the descending liver were
collected and preserved overnight in 10% formalin (CH2O) with a pH
7.4 phosphate buffer solution.
All the animal experiments were performed in Deshpande
Laboratory, Bhopal, India, after approval by the Committee for the
Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals
(CPCSEA) (approval number: 14010/c/11/CPCSEA).
2.16 Tissue distribution studies
Tissue distribution studies in mice with SCID are required in anti-
liver cancer activity to determine the distribution and concentration
of a drug within the body after administration (54). This information
is important for understanding how the drug is metabolized and
cleared by the body, as well as for determining appropriate dosing
regimens. Additionally, tissue distribution studies can help to identify
any potential toxicities or side effects associated with the drug in
speciﬁc organs or tissues. In the case of anti-liver cancer activity,
knowing the distribution of the drug in the liver would be particularly
important to ensure the drug is reaching its target site and effectively
inhibiting the growth of cancer cells. The tissue distribution of a bolus
dosage of 20 mg/kg i.v. Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
was documented. The greatest concentration of CNB was found in
liver parenchymal hepatocyte tissue. The presence of CNB in the
tissues of other essential organs, such as the heart and kidney, suggests
that CNB distribution is indirectly dependent on the blood ﬂow and
perfusion rate of the organs. The increased afﬁnity of CNB in the liver
and pancreas enables the medication molecule to effectively treat liver
cancer. However, limited expression of CNB in brain endothelial cells
suggests that polymeric nanoparticles are unable to traverse the
blood-brain barrier without difﬁculty.
2.17 Pharmacokinetic study
06 Male Albino Wister rats (200 to 250 g) are separated into two
groups (n=3) for the purpose of conducting pharmacokinetic studies
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
06

(55). For up to 72 hours, a comparative plasma concentration-time
proﬁle of Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs was analysed.
The ﬁrst group was administered 20 mg/kg CNB via intravenous
bolus with 0.9% w/v sodium chloride and 10% Methanol (for
improving solubility). The second group received an intravenous
bolus dose of 20 mg/kg CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs with 0.9%w/v
sodium chloride and 10% methanol (for improving solubility).
Using the tail vein of rats, 500μL of blood samples were collected at
0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 48, and 72 hours from three animals in each
group. Blood samples were stored in a microcentrifuge tube and
centrifuged at 7,500 rpm for 30 minutes at 25°C to separate
supernatant plasma. The collected samples were analysed using the
RP-HPLC system and stored at -80°C (1290 Inﬁnity II LC System,
Agilent, USA). Using kinetica 5.0 pharmacokinetics software, the
obtained RP-HPLC variables were interpreted in terms of their
pharmacokinetics (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Yokohama)
2.18 Immunohistochemistry
Parafﬁn 10μm thick sections of xenograft HePG2 cancer cell tissues
embedded in liver parenchyma blocks. The blocks were imaged in a 10
mM citrate buffer solution and autoclaved for 20 minutes to extract
antigens. After heating the section slide blocks, they were allowed to
cool for 1.5 hours at room temperature. The sectioned slides were then
incubated overnight at 4°C with a primary antibody against Hepatocyte
speciﬁc antigen (Hep Par 1) (91091816- SK-HEP-1, Sigma-Aldrich,
Bengaluru, India). Further, section slides were incubated with enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
conjugated Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) secondary antibody (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc, Vadodara, Gujarat) for 1hr followed by treatment with
120μL 30-3-diaminobenzide (Dako). For analysing the results of
Immunohistochemistry, ﬁve square zones (400 m x 400 m) were
measured and averaged for the number of stained cells in each
sectioned slide. Using GraphPad Prism 9 (San Diego, California) and
student t-test statistical analyses were performed.
2.19 Statistical evaluation
The statistical calculation and interpretations were performed by
GraphPad Prism 9.0.0.121 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA
92108). The experiments were performed thrice and deﬁned as the
mean ± standard deviation (SD). For comparison between two
groups, student t-test and for multiple groups, ANOVA was
applied. The p<0.05 was recognized as statistically signiﬁcant.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Preparations of PLGA-PSar-encapsulated
cabozantinib nanoparticles
To improvise local therapeutic effects, biodegradable depots in
nanosized polymeric particle forms could be the best non-invasive
approach for drug delivery applications. Biodegradable synthetic
polymers such as, lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) & Poly-Sarcosine
(PSar) were used in this experiment for synthesizing polymeric
nanoparticles. The polymers are made up of single monomers (56);
therefore, the excretion from the body would be effective, and hence,
they possess low toxicity (57). These nanosized polymeric
nanoparticles could play a fundamental role while delivering a drug
to the targeted tissues or oranges. According to Mohadese Alirezaei
et al. (58) Vulgaris oil-containing PLGA-chitosan-folic acid
nanoparticles (AVEO-PCF-NPs) exhibit excellent anticancer
properties against the HT-29 cell line (58). Furthermore, Chinese
yam polysaccharides PLGA nanoparticles stabilized Pickering
emulsion can be prepared by using 5 mg/mL of PLGA. Due to the
presence of PLGA, CYP-PPAS emulsion exhibits outstanding stability
at 4°C and 37°C for 28 days, according to Yue Zhang et al. (59). It is
clear from both research ﬁndings that PLGA exhibits excellent
stability and can be a suitable polymer for anticancer drug delivery.
The intrinsic characteristics of polymers are investigated during the
selection of any biological macromolecules. These biocompatible
polymers help to encapsulate biodegradable particles. For targeting
tissues and cells, these agents act as a depot. These kinds of delivery
possessed higher non-toxic effects, durability, sustainability and
controlled release quality in blood. Most importantly, polymeric
nanoparticles enhance the hydrophilicity as well as zeta potential.
Polymers become water-soluble when they contain polar or charged
functional groups (60). Water or other polar substances can interact with
polymers or dissolve them. Further, the presence of PVA in the
nanoparticles could inﬂuence the zeta potential of the nanoparticles (61).
Nevertheless, polymeric nanoparticles improvise bioadhesive
properties and release the nature of the formulations. Therefore, in this
experiment, biocompatible PLGA-PSar copolymers are used for the
encapsulation. The temperature-sensitive PLGA-PSar copolymers
remain in a solution state between 0°C to 20°C and shift to a gel state
between 37°C to 77°C. The copolymer is comprised of hydrophilic PSar
and a hydrophobic moiety; As a result, the copolymers might function as
amphiphilic copolymers. The preparation of oil/water emulsion can
instantly be formed when the organic phase is incorporated into the
aqueous phase in the presence of prob sonication. The polymeric
nanoparticle’s reaction rate can be enhanced due to the presence of
Gibbs-Marangoni effects (62). The solidiﬁcation process of nanoparticle
preparation helps to build condensed nanoparticles. It was observed
during initial analysis to prevent nanoparticle aggregation that emulsiﬁers
within the water in oil interphase restrict nanoparticle aggregation. The
amphiphilic copolymer and stabilizer, PVA, has been added as an
emulsiﬁer during nanoparticle formulation. The hydrophobic portion
(undissociated vinyl acetate portion) of PVA diffused into the organic
phase and was eventually trapped inside the nanoparticles. The
hydrophilic portion of PVA remains active in the surroundings of
hydrophilic segments of nanoparticles, and stability persists due to
steric hindrance. PVA contains many hydroxyl groups, forming
hydrogen bonds with the water molecules and making it highly soluble
in water. The molecular weight and degree of hydrolysis of PVA
determine its solubility (63).
3.2 Particle size and morphological studies
The in-vitro drug release proﬁle is very signiﬁcant; the in-vitro
biodistribution and cellular absorption of the prepared nanoparticles
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
07

display a characteristic and optimum behavior. The CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs particle size, PDI, and zeta potential could therefore play a
crucial role in the stability and all distinctive & optimum behavior of
the nanoparticles. From Figures 1A, B, the average particle diameters
of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs were found to be 192.0 ± 3.67 nm with a
PDI of 0.128. The zeta potential was found to be -24.18 ± 3.34 mV in
double distilled water; however, in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer solution,
the zeta potential of the nanoparticles was found to be -23.89 ± 1.07
mV. From the particle size distribution curve, it can conclude that the
exact binomial distribution or Gaussian distribution had been
recorded. Rifampicin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles (RIF-NPs) can be
formed using the nanoprecipitation method, according to Eva
Snejdrova et al. (64), to treat musculoskeletal infections (64). The
obtained nanoparticles range in size from 200 to 380 nm and have a
negative zeta potential. Paclitaxel and Lapatinib dual-loaded chitosan-
coated PLGA nanoparticles with a particle size range of 157.4 ± 9.2 to
263.5 ± 13.5 nm were created, according to Subrahmanyam Pitchika
et al. (65). These two studies suggest that PLGA can be used to create
nanoparticles with sizes between 180 and 400 nm; the results are
consistent with our recent studies. During nanoparticles size
measurement, it was observed that after encapsulation of
Cabozantinib inside of the polymeric nanoparticles, the core
diameter increases for the nanoparticles, and hence Cabozantinib
encapsulated nanoparticles are more signiﬁcant in size than blank
nanoparticles. Due to the higher negative zeta potential of the
formulation, the formulation could have a longer circulation half-
life. Due to the deportation of H+ ions from the carboxylic group of
PLGA, the negative zeta potential has emerged. Since zeta podetial is a
surface phenomenon, it was observed that zeta potential and particle
size are inversely proportional; which means increasing PLGA-PSar
concentration on the outer surface of the nanoparticles would lead to
a decrease in zeta potential. Hence, higher negative zeta potential
could lead to the formation of smaller particle sizes and, thus, higher
migration capacity observed in nanoparticles, which ultimately
provides good stability in colloidal dispersion. The drug loading
capacity of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs was found to be 14.67 ± 3.86%,
and encapsulation efﬁcacy was found to be 76.35 ± 2.76%. The
monodispersed nature of the polymeric nanoparticles was further
investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The SEM
results suggest that there is a persistent similarity of particle size
results obtained from the particle size analyzer with SEM results. The
homogeneity of the nanoparticles with core structure was observed in
SEM images with the highest diameter of 228.8 nm. It measured the
lowest diameter at 124.3nm (Figure 1C). The average particle size
obtained by Delsa Nano C instruments (Beckman Coulter, USA) was
found relatively more signiﬁcant than the results obtained from SEM
(Carl Zeiss Evo 10 Scanning Electron Microscope) analysis; which is
due to the presence of dehydration environment during the time of
the SEM experiment. Figure 1D represents the TEM analysis of CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs, which indicates perfect spherical-shaped drug-
loaded nanoparticles (<200nm). From scanning force microscopy
or atomic force microscopy, the non-destructive surface of
nanomaterials, kurtosis (0.712), skewness (0.264), and roughness
(4.134), can be measured using NOVA software. From Figures 1E,
F the average height of the nanoparticles was found to be 198.67 ±
0.32 nm; the obtained particles’ average height had signiﬁcant
similarity with the results obtained from SEM, TEM, and DLS
studies, indicating the vital signiﬁcance of the particles in different
measurement conditions. The AFM report suggests the spherical and
symmetrical nature of the prepared CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs surface.
3.3 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
The main intention of FTIR spectroscopy was to identify the
complete loading capacity of the drug into the carrier. The FTIR
FIGURE 1
Physical characterization of the CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs: (A) Size of the NPs. (B1) Zeta potential of the NPs in water; (B2) Zeta potential of the NPs in
Phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.4).(C) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of the NPs. (D) Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) of the NPs (E) Atomic force microscopy image of NPs in 3D (F) Atomic force microscopy image of NPs in 2D.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
08

spectroscopy of Cabozantinib (CNB), PLGA, PSar, PLGA-PSar-NPs
(without drug), and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs (with drug) were
displayed in Figure 2A. In Cabozantinib (CNB) spectra, at 1221.904
cm-1 N-O aromatic stretch was observed, C=O stretch was observed
at 1646.66 cm-1, at 3411.42 cm-1 aromatic O-H stretch was observed.
poly D, L-lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) shows characteristic peak at
1606.61 cm-1, 1742.85 cm-1 & 2977.14 cm-1 indicating the presence of
carboxylic acid C=O stretch, ester C=O stretch and carboxylic acid
dimer O-H stretch respectively. The polysarcosine (PSar) also shows a
characteristic peak at 1723.80 cm-1, 3305.71 cm-1, which indicates the
presence of aldehyde C=O stretch & O-H stretch. The placebo
formulation (PLGA-PSar-NPs) showed strong C=O stretch at
1733.33 cm-1; however, no signiﬁcant characteristic peak was
observed between 2750 cm-1 to 4000 cm-1, indicating the complete
encapsulation of PSar and PLGA within the placebo nanoparticles.
The ﬁnal CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs shows a characteristic peak at
1761.90 cm-1, 2939.04 cm-1, 3315.23 cm-1 indicating the presence of
monomeric C=O stretching, carboxylic acid dimer OH stretch, and
alkynes C-H stretch. The appearance of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs FTIR
spectra indicates the interactions of Cabozantinib (CNB), PLGA,
and PSar.
3.4 In vitro release kinetics of cabozantinib
For the Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treatment, it is essential
to have prolonged and consistent release of Cabozantinib (CNB) from
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. The release of Cabozantinib (CNB) from the
polymeric nanoparticles was estimated in pH 5.0 and pH 7.4 at 37°C.
It was palpable from the release proﬁle; the drug has shown an initial
bust affect up to 4th hour of drug release. This burst release signiﬁes
the presence of drug content onto the surface of polymeric
nanoparticles, which elevates initial drug release. After 5th hr a
steady state concentration was reached at both the pH and hence
prolonged release drug proﬁling was witnessed at 140hr. It was
observed that at pH 7.4, the drug release from CNB-PLGA-PSar-
NPs was found to be much more profound as compared to drug
release at pH 5.0. At 140th hours in pH 7.4 the Cabozantinib shows
they release up to 84.25 ± 7.89% whereas else, at pH 5.0, Cabozantinib
from the nanoparticles was found to be 96.56 ± 7.89%. It was observed
that during the time of cellular internalization at pH 5.0,
Cabozantinib (CNB) shows higher releases as compared to pH 7.4;
which may be due to the acidic nature and pH-sensitive behavior of
the cancerous cell surface (Figure 2B). The pinocytosis and
endocytosis are responsible for cellular internalization of
nanoparticles. The prolongation in drug release in the tumour site
could enhance the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic drugs near to the
cancerous cells. Further, the nanoparticular approach incepted in this
research could enhance the selectivity proﬁling of the medicaments,
and in lower dosage regimes, it can effectively target cancerous cells
omitting healthy cells. The prolonged-release proﬁling of the
nanoparticles could enhance the delivery of drug in constant
manner into the cancerous cells, which ultimately leads to an
increase the cytotoxicity effects.
3.5 In vitro cytotoxicity
The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) (66) assay helps to determine the cytotoxicity
effects of free Cabozantinib (CNB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
against hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (HepG2). The IC50 value
of Cabozantinib (CNB) loaded polymeric nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs) was found to be 45.67 mg/mL, 34.73 mg/mL, and 21.56 mg/
mL respectively, when exposed at 24hr, 48hr and 72hr. Figure 3
suggests that in time and dose-dependent manner, the free
FIGURE 2
(A) FTIR data of Cabozantinib (CNB), PLGA, PSar, PLGA-PSar-NPs, CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. (B) In vitro release kinetics of CNB from CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs in
PBS at pH 5.0 and 7.4 and data are presented as mean ± SD (n= 3).
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
09

Cabozantinib (CNB) and Cabozantinib (CNB) loaded polymeric
nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs) show anticancer effects
against hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (HepG2) (67, 68). Due to
the control and slow-release properties of the drug from the
polymeric nanoparticles, it exhibits a higher cytotoxicity proﬁle as
compared to free Cabozantinib (CNB). Therefore, polymeric
nanoformulations could be the best formulation approach to deliver
anticancer drugs in targeted site. As per Gao Feng Liang et al. (69)
research, the suppression effects of the miRNA can be enhanced when
PLGA-based gene delivery is performed for HePG2 cells. The PLGA
nanoparticles could be the best possible vector carriers for miRNA
with signiﬁcant transfection efﬁciency (69). These nanoparticles show
good serum stability against commercially available liposomes.
Cabozantinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that tends to block both
the MET and VEGF pathways from functioning, as Qiuhong Yang
et al. (70) study conﬁrmed (70). The cabozantinib-loaded micelles
outperformed the free cabozantinib solution in terms of intracellular
accumulation and cytotoxicity in human glioblastoma cancer cells
and non-small lung cancer cells. These ﬁndings imply that the
micellar form of cabozantinib may be an effective nanocarrier for
cancer therapies. As per Xiaoling Nie et al. (71) research by using the
nanoprecipitation method, SP94 peptide surface grafted poly
(ethylene glycol)-poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) biodegradable
polymeric nanoparticles were prepared for the delivery of
cryptotanshinone (71). The SP94 peptide surface grafted polymeric
nanoparticles signiﬁcantly increase cellular apoptosis and cytotoxicity
against hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (HepG2). As per Xiaobo
Yang et al. (72), Cabozantinib has a signiﬁcant effect against
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (72). However, no studies have been
reported so far which emphasized lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) &
Poly-Sarcosine (PSar) encapsulated Cabozantinib (CNB)
nanoparticles’ In vitro cytotoxicity effects against hepatocellular
carcinoma cell line (HepG2). The controlled release pattern of
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs enhances the therapeutics effects due to its
speciﬁc pathways and maintaining higher intercellular concentration.
3.6 DAPI staining
To investigate the cell viability of hepatocellular carcinoma cell
line (HepG2) accurately after administration of free Cabozantinib
(CNB), and Cabozantinib loaded polymeric nanoparticles (CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs), the treated cells were stained with 4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole, (DAPI) reagent and visualized under
ﬂuorescence microscopy to check resultant morphology. The
section shows circular-shaped cells without any shattering
(Figures 4A, B). The ﬂuorescence intensity of particle uptake was
measured and reported in Figures 4C, D. However, small
hemispherical nuclei were observed when cells were treated with
free Cabozantinib (CNB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. The higher
FIGURE 3
Effect of different concentrations of CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs and free CNB on the viability of hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (HepG2) cells after 24, 48,
and 72 h incubation. The ﬁgure shows that CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs are more anti-proliferative when compared with CNB (*p < 0.05). The cell viability
was determined by MTT assay. These experiments are performed thrice mean ± SD; n= 3, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, where CNB group is considered as control.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
10

dose of free drugs and nanoparticles shows a signiﬁcant increase of
apoptosis. The CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs treated cells show dramatical
apoptosis against HepG2 cells as compared to free Cabozantinib
(CNB). Altogether, the viability of the HepG2 cells decreases when
treated with higher concentrations of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs due to
the persistent DNA damage.
3.7 Cell cycle arrest analysis
It is essential to measure Cabozantinib (CNB) and CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs mediated growth inhibition and to identify its speciﬁc
molecular mechanism by cell cycle arrest studies. In this study, the
speciﬁc DNA content of HepG2 cells was analyzed. The study was
designed for 48 hr, where 60 and 80 μg/mL Cabozantinib (CNB) and
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs were exposed in HepG2 cells. The dose-
depending cell cycle arrest can be witnessed for Cabozantinib
(CNB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs (Figures 5A–D). The drug and
the formulation have DNA synthesis inhibitor properties, as cycle
arrest data suggest that the mitotic division was passed by the cells but
arrest can be witnessed in S phase. The percentage of the S phase was
elevated from 10.55% to 24.80% for Cabozantinib (CNB) and 11.20%
36.77% for CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. The greater DNA damage causes
the cell cycle arrest in G1, S and G2/M phase. Varying with this
research, Yang Liu et al. (73) witnessed calycosin could induce cell
cycle arrest in G0/G1 when treated for hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells (73). It follows AKT signaling pathway. In our current
research, S phase arrest is possible due to the inhibition of cell cycle
progression which is due to the ant-proliferative effects of
Cabozantinib (CNB) and control and target-based release proﬁling
of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. According to Shamim Akhtar Suﬁa et al.
(74), curcumin and indole-curcumin analog-loaded polysorbate 80-
stabilized PLGA nanoparticles have a great anticancer effect on
SW480 colon cell lines (74). The size of the NPs that were made
ranged from 50 to 150 nm. When nanoparticles were used to treat the
SW480 cancer cell line, nuclear fragmentation, blocking of the cell
cycle, stopping apoptosis, and metastatic biomarkers happened. The
effects of Anti-EGFR conjugated Docetaxel loaded PLGA
nanoparticles on the human lung carcinoma A549 cell line were
studied by Jitendrakumar Patel et al. (75). They discovered that the
cell cycle slowed down in the S phase with more cells in the G2/M
phase and stopped in the G2/M phase. A549 cell lines, on the other
hand, experienced a growth arrest in the G2/M phase when using the
DTX-NPs system (75).
3.8 Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was used to do an apoptosis assay to ﬁnd out how
signiﬁcant the effects of the cell responses were (76). This study
explains how cells respond to the given treatment. A paramount
percentage of apoptosis was observed in Cabozantinib (CNB), and
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs loaded group as compared to the untreated
control group. The apoptosis percentage was found to be high for
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs loaded group as compared to the free drug.
Almost 20% apoptosis was recorded in the early stage, and 25%
apoptosis was recorded in the late stage. Nearly 35% apoptosis was
recorded in the late apoptosis chamber. Therefore CNB-PLGA-PSar-
NPs possessed a higher therapeutic index and optimum anticancer
effects (Figure 6). As per Salih Abdul Mahdi et al. (77), 5-FU loaded
biocompatible polymeric magnetic nanoparticles and FA-DEX-
SPION NPs exert synergistic effects for targeting intracellular
delivery of 5-FU, apoptosis induction, and gene expression
stimulation (77)
A
B
D
C
FIGURE 4
Carbozanitib (CNB)-induced apoptosis and DNA damage in hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (HepG2) cells as examined by DAPI staining. HepG2 cells
exposed to different concentrations of CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs and free CNB for 48 h and apoptosis was determined by DAPI staining by
ﬂuorescence microscopy. (A) represented the control (untreated), CNB 60 mg/mL, and CNB 80 mg/mL, respectively. (B) represented the control
(untreated), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs 60 mg/mL, and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs 80 mg/mL, respectively. (C) Mean ﬂuorescence intensity of HepG2 cells at 48hr
when treated with 60 and 80 mg/mL of CNB. (D) Mean ﬂuorescence intensity of HepG2 cells at 48hr when treated with 60 and 80 mg/mL of CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs. Data are presented as mean ± SD. The graph represents data from two independent experiments. p<0.05, student t-test.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
11

3.9 Real-time PCR analysis
In this study, we investigated the effects of different
concentrations of free Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs,
or a combination of the two on the genes in the human hepatoma
HepG2 cell line (78). Affymetrix Human Genome 1.0 S. T arrays were
utilized in the study to conduct a microarray analysis. The microarray
results were validated using real-time RT-PCR and semi-quantitative
RT-PCR. In HepG2 cells exposed for 24 hours to free Cabozantinib
(CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs at concentrations of 0, 25, and 55 μg/
mL. The real-time PCR was used to examine the mRNA levels of
MT1F, MT1X, GSTA1, and APOA4. According to the current
ﬁndings, CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs change the mRNA expression of
the genes listed above much more than free CNB. In other words,
when free Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs-treated cells
were compared to control cells, the expression of MT1F, MT1X, and
APOA4 was signiﬁcantly upregulated while the levels of MT1X and
MTTP were decreased. The well-known metallothionein MT1F is
essential for the stability of the genome, the cell cycle, and apoptosis.
It has many different targets. In the presence of glutathione S-
transferases, an apoptogenic factor, GST02 as an initiator and
GSTA2 as an effector, it has been shown that most polymeric NPs
promote penetrability transition, which in turn promotes apoptosis.
In a previous study, the main proteins that control mitochondrial-
mediated apoptosis were found to be from the MT1X family. The
proapoptotic and antiapoptotic activities of MT1X and GSTA1 have
been found. Cysteine proteases were successfully conserved by the
family of cytoplasmic proteases known as caspases, which is essential
in the apoptotic signaling pathway. The most important member of
the family, MT1X, is essential for the induction of apoptosis.
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) overexpression in
the liver is required for the hepatic secretion of lipoproteins
containing apoprotein B (apoB). Inhibition of MTTP results in a
decrease in plasma levels of apoB and hepatic triglyceride secretion
(Figure 7). Overexpression, which is present in more than 45% of
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells, causes hepatic cancer in
transgenic mice. In this study, we demonstrated that upregulation
of the tumour suppressor genes MT1F, MT1X, and APOA4 and
downregulation of the genes MT1X and MTTP are the mechanisms
by which free Cabozantinib (CNB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs kill
HepG2 cells. However, it is essential to assess the novel therapeutic
effects of prepared NPs based on CNB. Dorota Katarzyska-Banasik
et al. (79) carried out a similar experiment and chose eight genes for
validation: HPRT, HMBS, VIM, SDHA, TBP, RPL13, GAPDH, and
18S rRNA. The ideal combination of reference genes, according to
geNorm, is TPP and SDHA (79). P53, P21, Caspase-9, and AKT-1
expressions were upregulated in FA-VNC-DEX-SPION Tera-1-
treated cells, during RT-PCR studies, according to Sharafaldin Al-
Musawi et al. (80). As per Shuang Liu et al. (81) ﬁndings, C-terminal
binding protein 1 (CTBP1) was the most stable reference gene among
6 candidates evaluated by genorm and normalﬁnder in RT-qPCR
analysis of tumor tissues from male hepatocellular carcinoma patients
with hepatitis B infection and cirrhosis. The stability values for
CTBP1 were 0.08 and 0.044 for genorm and normﬁnder,
respectively. The authors recommend using CTBP1 as the best
candidate reference gene for RT-qPCR in studies of HCC related to
HBV infection.In our current research also MT1X and MTTP were
downlreguated.Alltogather the study investigated the effects of
different concentrations of free Cabozantinib (CNB) and CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs on genes in the human hepatoma HepG2 cell line.
A
B
D
C
FIGURE 5
Flow cytometry was used to analyse cell cycle distribution and DNA content in HepG2 cells treated by CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs and free CNB
for 48 h (A, B) The cells were stained with PI and the cell cycle stage was deﬁned by DNA content. (C, D) The percentages of cell populations in the G0/
G1, S, and G2/M phases was determined by gating during the ﬂow cytometry experiment for control, free CNB and CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs at
60 µg/mL & 80 µg/mL concentration. These experiments are performed thrice mean ± SD; n= 3, **p <0.05, where untreated group is considered as
control.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
12

The study used microarray analysis, real-time RT-PCR and semi-
quantitative RT-PCR. The results showed that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
change the mRNA expression of certain genes more than free CNB.
These changes led to the promotion of apoptosis, and the inhibition of
MTTP which results in a decrease in plasma levels of Apolipoprotein
B and hepatic triglyceride secretion. The study suggests that the
upregulation of tumour suppressor genes and downregulation of
certain genes are the mechanisms by which free Cabozantinib
(CNB) and CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs kill HepG2 cells.
3.10 Erythrocyte membrane integrity
In this investigation, centrifugation was employed to separate
plasma and white blood cells from blood, leaving only erythrocytes
ﬂoating in normal saline solution. Researchers were able to determine
membrane integrity by measuring LDH enzyme concentrations. A
defect in the erythrocyte membrane integrity produces an increase in
LDH release. The amount of LDH released after treating 1 mL of
erythrocyte suspension with phosphate buffer solution, Cabozantinib
(CNB), PLGA-PSar-encapsulated Cabozantinib nanoparticles (CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs) (Equivalent to 10, 50, and 100 μg/mL of
Cabozantinib), and placebo (PLGA-PSar-NPs) nanoparticles equal
to the volume of molecular weights of PLGA nanoparticles of
Cabozantinib (CNB) were mentioned respectively. Surprisingly,
after 8 hours of incubation, placebo formulations did not
demonstrate a signiﬁcant rise in LDH compared to phosphate
buffer-treated samples. At these concentrations of test samples,
erythrocytes are not harmed, according to the optional ﬁndings.
Triton X 100, on the other hand, exhibits exceptionally signiﬁcant
LDH release, suggesting entire erythrocyte destruction. As a
consequence, Cabozantinib (CNB) would not alter the integrity of
erythrocyte membranes; thus, produced nanoparticles containing
Cabozantinib (CNB) would be safe for intravenous administration
from the perspective of erythrocyte safety (Figures 8A, B).
3.11 In-vivo anti-tumour efﬁcacy study
For the anticancer study, mice with severe combined
immunodeﬁciency disorder (SCID) were given lateral tail vein
injections of Cabozantinib (CNB) (20 mg/kg), CNB-PLGA-PSar-
NPs (20 mg/kg). In animals with established HePG2 tumours,
Cabozantinib (CNB) 20 mg/kg. i.v. which is a standard-of-care
FIGURE 6
Flow cytometry analysis of HepG2 cells treated with different concentrations of CNB loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs and free CNB for 48 h, followed by
staining with Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI). Results are representative of three independent experiments.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
13

chemotherapy agent for liver cancer, decreased the size of the
tumours by a large amount compared to the normal vehicle
control. Compared to the vehicle control group, treatment with
CNB reduced the size of tumours by 60.3% at 21 days (Figure 9A).
Compared to the vehicle control, the lyophilized dose of CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs (20 mg/kg. i.v.) showed an 85.67% reduction in the size of
the tumour (Figure 9B). So, we can say that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
works better against tumours in biological systems. Surprisingly,
when CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs was injected into the animals, they lost
weight and had great anti-tumour effects for a long time. This is a
strong sign that the drug is targeting tumour tissues. So, polymeric
nanoparticle systems of CNB made with PLGA and PSar have the
A
B
FIGURE 8
(A). Amount of LDH release after treating with different concentration (10 µg/mL,50 µg/mL,100µg/mL) of Cabozantinib (CNB), PLGA-PSar-encapsulated
Cabozantinib nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs), and placebo (PLGA-PSar-NPs) nanoparticles against PBS (posative control) Triton X 100(negative
control) at 8th hour. (B). Microsopic images of human erytocytic membrane after incorporation of CNB, PLGA-PSar-NPs, CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs in the
presence of posative and negative control.
FIGURE 7
The expression levels of MT1F, MT1X, APOA4, MT1X, MTTP genes in relative to the reference gene; Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) in HepG2 cancer cell line treated with the CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs and free CNB. *P< 0.05, **P< 0.01 and ***P< 0.001 vs. control
was considered signiﬁcant.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
14

beneﬁt of reducing the higher dose-dependent toxicity of anticancer
drugs while at the same time making the drugs work better against
cancer. Shu Li et al. (2019 injected SKOV-3 cells into nude mice to
induce ovarian cancer while developing folate-modiﬁed PLGA-based
nanoparticles for the treatment of ovarian cancer. Compare to other
groups, higher sensitivity against ovarian cancer is demonstrated by
FA-PEG2000-PLGADTX/GEM NPs. Anti-Erb-BTNB-PCL-NPs
demonstrated maximum in vivo anti-tumor efﬁcacy in a similar
pattern during our experiment.
3.12 Tissue distribution studies
The tissue distribution was studied by separating 18 SCID mice
into three groups (each group had six mice). The drug and its Nano
formulations were administered intravenously (i.v.) at a bolus dose of
20 mg/kg. Groups of mice were given a dosage and then killed eight
hours later. The organs such as the liver, heart, colon, small intestine,
stomach, brain, rectum muscle, and kidneys were harvested for study.
Intact brain endothelial cells were isolated using a stereotaxic device
(New Standard TM Stereotaxic Instrument (Model No.: 51500),
USA). Tissue samples were washed in 0.9% sodium chloride
solution, patted dry, then homogenised in cold physiological
solution and ﬁltered. The samples were analysed using RP-UHPLC
(Dionex Ultimate, 3000). Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test
showed that CNB had a very signiﬁcant distribution in liver, heart,
stomach, and rectum tissues (p<0.05), suggesting that the nano-
formulation (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs) would have a wider blood
distribution and an appropriately high stomach resistance.
Moreover, nanoparticles were found in a much more widespread
fashion in the small intestine (p<0.05), indicating sufﬁcient resistance
in a basic environment. This also led to a signiﬁcantly increased
concentration of Nano formulations in the rectum. Nano-
formulations don’t accumulate in the kidney, as shown by a p>0.05,
lending credence to the hypothesis of rapid elimination. There is a
signiﬁcant decrease in drug accumulation in the brain, which is
indicative of decreased drug absorption by Nanoformulations
across the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB) and, thus, decreased
neurotoxicity. Bio-distribution results showed that CNB and CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs were more widely distributed in the parenchymal
hepatocyte tissue of mice. Which suggests that the Nanoformulations
(CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs) might be a useful tool for delivering CNB to
the liver, which could be a promising approach to treating liver
cancer (Figure 9C).
3.13 Pharmacokinetic study
Cabozantinib (CNB), a BCS class-II drug, has limited anticancer
activity due to its low water solubility and poor bioavailability, despite
its anti-proliferative effects against solid tumours. In order to increase
the systemic bioavailability of Cabozantinib (CNB) and stop the
spread of liver cancer, we developed CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs, which
are polymeric nanoparticles encapsulating Cabozantinib (CNB). The
relevant pharmacokinetic parameters C0, Cmax, Vd, t1/2, CL, AUC, and
MRT are summarised in Table 1. Due to increased tissue bindings of
A
B
C
FIGURE 9
(A) Tumor regression study in HePG2 cells Xenograft model showing changes in relative tumour volume with time (days) of different groups of SCID
(severe combined immunodeﬁciency disorder) mice (n=6) treated with Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs. equivalent concentration 20 mg/kg,
I.V.) (B) Isolation of tumours after 21 days of studies (C) Comparative in vivo biodistribution of Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs in rectum, heart,
colon, small intestine, stomach, brain endothelium, liver, and kidney after i.v. administration of 20 mg/kg. i.v. bolus dose; values are represented as
mean± SD (n=6) (****) highly signiﬁcance; p<0.00001, (***) moderately signiﬁcance<0.0001, (**)partial signiﬁcance; p<0.001, (*) less signiﬁcance< 0.05,
(#) statistically non-signiﬁcance difference from CNB (p>0.05; all the formulations were compared against controlled group(CNB).
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
15

Cabozantinib (CNB) encapsulated polymeric nanoparticles
after intravenous bolus administration, as indicated by the
pharmacokinetic proﬁle of the drug and drug-encapsulated
polymeric nanoparticles, the clearance (CL) value gradually
decreased. Indicating that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs inhibited opsonin
protein adhesion, the mean residence time (MRT) of CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs was 50.0867 ± 3.78h, which was signiﬁcantly longer than
the MRT of Cabozantinib (CNB). This might be because
nanoparticles are sneaky, allowing them to bypass the
reticuloendothelial system and prolong systemic circulation. The
statistically signiﬁcant differences between free Cabozantinib (CNB)
and CNB contained polymeric nanoparticles (CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs)
were compared using Dunnett’s student t-test. CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
had signiﬁcantly higher maximum plasma drug concentrations
(C max), total clearance (CL), and area under the curve (AUC) than
free CNB (p<0.001). Based on Figure, it was found that the plasma
concentration of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs, which are polymeric
nanoparticles coated with polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) and
polysarcosine (PSar), was signiﬁcantly higher than that of free CNB.
Additionally, the surface ﬁnish of nanoparticles inﬂuences how well
they circulate. The corona coating of PLGA and PSar over
nanoparticles prevents plasma protein adsorption, prolongs the
time that blood circulates through the body. Therefore, CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs and all CNB-encapsulated polymeric nanoparticles
could function as a potential Cabozantinib (CNB) delivery system to
liver cancer (Figure 10).
3.14 In vivo immunohistochemical study
Tumour sections were immunohistochemically (IHC) stained for
Hep Par 1 expression. This was done so that the proliferative ability of
cancer cells could be evaluated in vivo. Hep Par 1 is a cell marker that
can be found during all of the active phases of the cell cycle, including
G1, S, G2, and M. It is widely used for the purpose of determining the
rate of cell proliferation. A suboptimal response to chemotherapy is
associated with high levels of expression of Hep Par 1, which is also
linked to aggressive tumour behaviour, vascular invasion, and
metastasis of tumours. IHC investigations for Hep Par 1 using
parafﬁn-embedded xenograft cancer tissue blocks from mice with
(A) control (PBS-treated) group, (B) CNB -treated group, and (C)
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs -treated group are depicted in Figure. For the
purpose of evaluating the IHC data, ﬁve random 400 μm × 400 μm
square zones were placed on each sectioned slide. As can be seen in
Figure, tumours that were treated with CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs had a
signiﬁcantly lower Hep Par 1 labelling index (3.14 ± 1.71) than those
that were treated with free CNB (9.22 ± 1.67) or the control group
(15.26 ± 1.88), indicating that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs are effective in
inhibiting the growth of tumours. This is supported by the fact that
the control group had a signiﬁcantly higher index. Based on these
ﬁndings, it appears that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs play a signiﬁcant part
in the process of increasing the inhibition of tumour cell growth,
causing the death of tumour cells, and demonstrating the ability to
assist in the suppression of tumours (Figures 11A–D).
4 Discussion
The fabrication of nanoparticles composed of Poly D, L-lactic-co-
glycolic acid (PLGA) and Polysarcosine (PSar) over Cabozantinib
(CNB) has been studied for its potential in inducing apoptosis and
cytotoxicity in human HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines and
in SCID female mice model. CNB is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that is
known to have anti-tumor activity, and the addition of PLGA and
PSar to the CNB nanoparticles may enhance this activity.In the study,
the CNB nanoparticles were fabricated using a double emulsion
solvent evaporation method. The PLGA and PSar were then added
to the nanoparticles as coating materials. The resulting nanoparticles
were characterized for their size, shape, and surface charge. The
nanoparticles were further evaluated for cytotoxicity and apoptosis-
inducing ability of the CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs nanoparticles in human
HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells. The results showed that the
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs nanoparticles were more effective in inducing
apoptosis and cytotoxicity in the cancer cells than CNB alone.
Additionally, the study also found that the CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
nanoparticles caused a signiﬁcant downregulation of the expression of
genes related to cell proliferation, migration and invasion.
Polysarcosine (PSar) and PLGA nanoparticles are advantageous as a
delivery system for cabozantinib (CNB) due to their ability to protect
the drug from degradation and improve its solubility. Additionally,
these nanoparticles can target speciﬁc cells or tissues, leading to
increased drug efﬁcacy and reduced toxicity. Furthermore,
polysarcosine (PSar) and PLGA nanoparticles have been shown to
have improved stability, which increases the shelf life of the drug and
TABLE 1 Pharmacokinetic parameters Cabozantinib (CNB), CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs after intravenous administration of 20 mg/kg dose.
Parameters
CNB
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
C0(ng/mL)
215.148 ± 16.32
713.032 ± 23.37
C max (ng/mL)
241.313 ± 34.21
668.25 ± 56.62*
Vd (ml)
1522.30 ± 1.54
22342 ± 40.420
t1/2(hr-1)
05.21 ± 0.18
37.433 ± 2.25
CL (mL/hr)
124.51 ± 1.13
32.536 ± 8.49*
AUC (ng*mL/hr)
1956.73 ± 111.39
29926.234 ± 653.89*
MRT (h)
7.445 ± 0.24
43.0661 ± 10.58
Data are presented as mean ± SD (n=3) (*) statistically signiﬁcantly different from ECF.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
16

reduces the need for frequent dosing. The study of Poly D, L-lactic-
co-glycolic acid, and Polysarcosine over Cabozantinib nanoparticles
(CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs) has been further conﬁrmed for its excellent
bio-compatibility and liver disposition using various techniques such
as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay, pharmacokinetics, tissue
distribution, immune-histochemistry and in-vivo anticancer effects
in SCID female mice. The LDH assay was used to evaluate the
cytotoxicity of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs on normal human blood
erythrocytes and the results showed that the CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
treated erythrocytes generate less Lactate dehydrogenase in compared
to CNB treated erythrocytes. Pharmacokinetic studies were
conducted to evaluate the pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution
of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs in male albino wister rats. The results
showed that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs had a prolonged circulation
time and were preferentially distributed to the liver, which is
consistent with the excellent liver disposition of the nanoparticles.
Immune-histochemistry was performed to evaluate the anticancer
effects of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs on HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma
cells; signifying, CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs play a noteworthy part in the
process of increasing the inhibition of tumour cell growth, causing the
death of tumour cells. The in-vivo anti cancer results showed that
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs pointedly reduced the tumor volume and
induced cancer cell death. Overall, these results conﬁrm the
excellent bio-compatibility, liver disposition and anticancer effects
of CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs in SCID female mice. These ﬁndings
suggest that CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs may be a promising therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Further
studies are needed to fully understand the mechanisms of action of
these nanoparticles and to optimize their design for in vivo use.
5 Conclusion
We created a nanocarrier system based on CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs
that were loaded with Cabozantinib (CNB), and we assessed it using
SEM, TEM, AFM, FTIR, in-vitro drug release, and HepG2 cancer cells
to determine its anticancer effect. We made nanosized, spherical
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs particles with a small variety of sizes. The
CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs had a robust cytotoxic effect on
the HepG2 cancer cells. The fact that CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-
FIGURE 10
Concentration-time proﬁles in plasma of Cabozantinib (CNB) after i.v. bolus administration of CNB suspension and CNB loaded polymeric nanoparticles
(CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs) at 20 mg/kg to 6 male albino Wister rats (200–250 g) (n=3). The reverse phase HPLC method was used to ﬁgure out how much
CNB was in the plasma. Put in an HPLC chromatogram showing the amount of CNB in the plasma. The CNB concentration in plasma was determined
using reverse phase HPLC. Incorporate the plasma CNB concentration as an HPLC chromatogram.
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
17

NPs have a more signiﬁcant HepG2 cancer cell-killing effect than free
CNB may be attributed to their sustained and prolonged drug release
characteristics, high cellular internalization, and tumour targeting
efﬁcacy. Furthermore, it has been shown that the HepG2 cell lines
were considerably affected by the CNB nanoformulation’s strong
induction of apoptosis. Finally, it has been shown that CNB-loaded
CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs can trigger cell death since cancer cells treated
with them have increased tumour suppressor and apoptotic gene
activity compared to the free CNB group. The study prepared and
tested CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs nanoparticles for the ﬁrst time for
biocompatibility, biodistribution, and anti-tumor activity against
the human HepG2 liver cancer cell line and SCID female mice. We
performed lactate dehydrogenase assay, pharmacokinetic studies,
tissue distribution studies, in vivo cancer activity in SCID female
mice, and immunohistochemistry to conﬁrm the biocompatibility,
biodistribution, and anti-tumor activity of the prepared CNB-PLGA-
PSar-NPs nanoparticles.Thus, our results demonstrate the potential
of innovative CNB-loaded CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs as a novel strategy
for treating hepatocellular carcinoma and the potential of CNB-
PLGA-PSar-NPs as a promising carrier in a CNB delivery system.
Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
Author contributions
Data curation, SB and VP. Funding acquisition, BP. Investigation,
VP and BP. Methodology, SB. Resources, BP. Supervision, BP.
Validation, VP. Writing – original draft, SB. Writing – review and
editing, BP. All the authors have reviewed and approved the ﬁnal
manuscript. SB communicated to the journal.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
FIGURE 11
Immunohistochemical study for the Hep Par 1 expression by (A) control (PBS buffer treated), (B) free CNB, and (C) CNB-PLGA-PSar-NPs treated
tumours. (D) The quantitative analysis of IHC results. Statistical comparisons were made using t-test; * partial signiﬁcance; p < 0.001; ** moderately
signiﬁcance < 0.000. The treatment was compared with control (PBS buffer treated).
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
18

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
References
1. Armandeh M, Bameri B, Samadi M, Heidari S, Foroumadi R, Abdollahi M. A
systematic review of nonclinical studies on the effect of curcumin in chemotherapy-
induced cardiotoxicity. Curr Pharm Design (2022) 28(22):1843–53. doi: 10.2174/
1381612828666220513125312
2. Salari N, Mansouri K, Valipour E, Abam F, Jaymand M, Rasoulpoor S, et al.
Hyaluronic acid-based drug nanocarriers as a novel drug delivery system for cancer
chemotherapy: A systematic review. DARU J Pharm Sci (2021) 29(2):439–47. doi:
10.1007/s40199-021-00416-6
3. Hosseini M, Baghaei K, Amani D, Ebtekar M. Tumor-derived exosomes
encapsulating miR-34a promote apoptosis and inhibit migration and tumor
progression of colorectal cancer cells under in vitro condition. DARU J Pharm Sci
(2021) 29(2):267–78. doi: 10.1007/s40199-021-00400-0
4. D’Angelo A, Sobhani N, Bagby S, Casadei-Gardini A, Roviello G. Cabozantinib as a
second-line treatment option in hepatocellular carcinoma. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
(2020) 13(6):623–9. doi: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1767591
5. Personeni N, Rimassa L, Pressiani T, Smiroldo V, Santoro A. Cabozantinib for the
treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2019) 19(10):847–55.
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2019.1674141
6. Yang F, Jin C, Jiang Y-j, Li J, Di Y, Fu D-L. Potential role of soluble VEGFR-1 in
antiangiogenesis therapy for cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2011) 11(4):541–9. doi:
10.1586/era.10.171
7. Modi SJ, Kulkarni VM. Exploration of structural requirements for the inhibition of
VEGFR-2 tyrosine kinase: Binding site analysis of type II. ‘DFG-out’ inhibitors J Biomol
Structure Dynamics (2022) 40(12):5712–27. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1872417
8. Wang H, Sun S, Zhang Y, Wang J, Zhang S, Yao X, et al. Improved drug targeting to
liver tumor by sorafenib-loaded folate-decorated bovine serum albumin nanoparticles.
Drug Delivery (2019) 26(1):89–97. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2018.1561766
9. IndolﬁL, Edelman ER, Langer RS, Clark JW, Ting DT, Ferrone CRA, et al. Local
drug delivery devices and methods for treating cancer. Google Patents (2021).
10. Soares A, Monteiro FSM, Maluf FC, Bastos DA, Jardim DL, Sasse AD, et al.
Advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC) management: an expert panel recommendation
from the Latin American cooperative oncology group (LACOG) and the Latin American
renal cancer group (LARCG). J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2020) 146(7):1829–45. doi:
10.1007/s00432-020-03236-4
11. Zobeiri M, Parvizi F, Kalhori MR, Majnooni MB, Farzaei MH, Abdollahi M. Targeting
miRNA by natural products: A novel therapeutic approach for nonalcoholic fatty liver.
Evidence-Based Complement Altern Med (2021) 2021:6641031. doi: 10.1155/2021/6641031
12. Ma J, Wang B, Shao H, Zhang S, Chen X, Li F, et al. Hydrogels for localized
chemotherapy of liver cancer: a possible strategy for improved and safe liver cancer
treatment. Drug Delivery (2022) 29(1):1457–76. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2022.2070299
13. Hou L, Du J, Wang J, Liu Y, Sun W, Zheng Y, et al. Expression of IL-13Ra2 in liver
cancer cells and its effect on targeted therapy of liver cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
(2010) 136(6):839–46. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0724-z
14. Li G, Zhao M, Zhao L. Lysine-mediated hydroxyethyl starch-10-hydroxy
camptothecin micelles for the treatment of liver cancer. Drug Delivery (2020) 27
(1):519–29. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2020.1745329
15. Bansal D, Yadav K, Pandey V, Ganeshpurkar A, Agnihotri A, Dubey N.
Lactobionic acid coupled liposomes: an innovative strategy for targeting hepatocellular
carcinoma. Drug Delivery (2016) 23(1):140–6. doi: 10.3109/10717544.2014.907373
16. Wang M, Wang L, Feng H, Jiang H, Zhou J, Wang X. Precise therapeutic effect of
self-assembling gold nanocluster–PTEN complexes on an orthotropic model of liver
cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2020) 146(4):875–82. doi: 10.1007/s00432-020-03163-4
17. Bhattacharya S, Anjum MM, Patel KK. Gemcitabine cationic polymeric
nanoparticles against ovarian cancer: formulation, characterization, and targeted drug
delivery. Drug Delivery (2022) 29(1):1060–74. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2022.2058645
18. Muhl C, Zengerling L, Groß J, Eckhardt P, Opatz T, Besenius P, et al. Insight into
the synthesis of n-methylated polypeptides11Electronic supplementary information
(ESI). Polymer Chem (2020) 11(43):6919–27. doi: 10.1039/d0py01055c. CCDC 1976455
and 1976456. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format.
19. Zhai G, Liu Q, Ji J, Wu Y, Geng J, Hu X. Recyclable polymerized Lewis acid poly-
BPh(C6F5)2 catalyzed selective n-formylation and n-methylation of amines with carbon
dioxide and phenylsilanes. J CO2 Utilization (2022) 61:102052. doi: 10.1016/
j.jcou.2022.102052
20. Tan J, Zhang Y-F. Synthesis and micellization of cationic trisiloxane surfactants
with poly(ethylene glycol). Colloids Surfaces A: Physicochem Eng Aspects (2022)
634:127946. doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2021.127946
21. Liu Z, Peng Y, Yang L, Zhang G. Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)-Chitosan–gelatin
composite nanomaterials for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcer wound infection.
nanotechnology (2021) 21(2):1070–8. doi: 10.1166/jnn.2021.18675
22. Ishiguchi H, Uchida M, Okamura T, Kobayashi S, Yano M. Acute heart failure
following the initiation of cabozantinib, a multikinase inhibitor: A case report. J Cardiol
cases (2022) 26(3):217–20. doi: 10.1016/j.jccase.2022.04.012
23. Casadei-Gardini A, Rimassa L, Rimini M, Yoo C, Ryoo B-Y, Lonardi S, et al.
Regorafenib versus cabozantinb as second-line treatment after sorafenib for unresectable
hepatocellular carcinoma: matching-adjusted indirect comparison analysis. J Cancer Res
Clin Oncol (2021) 147(12):3665–71. doi: 10.1007/s00432-021-03602-w
24. Bhattacharya S. Fabrication of poly(sarcosine), poly (ethylene glycol), and poly
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) polymeric nanoparticles for cancer drug delivery. J Drug Delivery
Sci Technol (2021) 61:102194. doi: 10.1016/j.jddst.2020.102194
25. Willers C, Svitina H, Rossouw MJ, Swanepoel RA, Hamman JH, Gouws C. Models
used to screen for the treatment of multidrug resistant cancer facilitated by transporter-
based efﬂux. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (2019) 145(8):1949–76. doi: 10.1007/s00432-019-
02973-5
26. Shkodra B, Press AT, Vollrath A, Nischang I, Schubert S, Hoeppener S, et al.
Formulation of liver-speciﬁc PLGA-DY-635 nanoparticles loaded with the protein kinase
c inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide I. Pharmaceutics (2020) 12(11):1110. doi: 10.3390/
pharmaceutics12111110
27. Senthilkumar M, Mishra P, Jain NK. Long circulating PEGylated poly(D,L-lactide-
co-glycolide) nanoparticulate delivery of docetaxel to solid tumors. J Drug Targeting
(2008) 16(5):424–35. doi: 10.1080/10611860802088598
28. Yu Y, Chen D, Li Y, Yang W, Tu J, Shen Y. Improving the topical ocular
pharmacokinetics of lyophilized cyclosporine a-loaded micelles: formulation, in vitro
and in vivo studies. Drug Delivery (2018) 25(1):888–99. doi: 10.1080/
10717544.2018.1458923
29. Fereig SA, El-Zaafarany GM, Arafa MG, Abdel-Mottaleb MMA. Boosting the anti-
inﬂammatory effect of self-assembled hybrid lecithin–chitosan nanoparticles via
hybridization with gold nanoparticles for the treatment of psoriasis: elemental mapping
and in vivo modeling. Drug Delivery (2022) 29(1):1726–42. doi: 10.1080/
10717544.2022.2081383
30. Adjou N, Yahia A, Oudjit MN, Dupuis M. Inﬂuence of HRWR molecular weight
and polydispersity on rheology and compressive strength of high-performance cement
paste. Construction Building Materials (2022) 327:126980. doi: 10.1016/
j.conbuildmat.2022.126980
31. Al-Bazali T. On the stability of shale: the role of zeta potential (z) and debye hückel
length (k–1) on shale swelling. Petroleum Sci Technol (2021) 39(21-22):1008–26. doi:
10.1080/10916466.2021.1981380
32. Yamamoto T, Takahashi S, Hasegawa T, Hongo H, Amizuka N. Morphological
variety of capillary ends invading the epiphyseal plate in rat femora using scanning
electron microscopy with osmium maceration. J Oral Biosci (2022). doi: 10.1016/
j.job.2022.04.006
33. Mugerli S, Zupančič D, Rok R, Lučovnik M. Transmission electron microscopy
demonstration of reduced endothelial glycocalyx in severe preeclampsia. Placenta (2022)
126:64–9. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2022.06.010
34. Yang Z, Liu Z, Zhu J, Xu J, Pu Y, Bao Y. Green synthesis and characterization of
gold nanoparticles from pholiota adiposa and their anticancer effects on hepatic
carcinoma. Drug Delivery (2022) 29(1):997–1006. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2022.2056664
35. Li Y, Wang C, Wang J, Chu T, Zhao L, Zhao L. Permeation-enhancing effects and
mechanisms of O-acylterpineol on isosorbide dinitrate: mechanistic insights based on
ATR-FTIR spectroscopy, molecular modeling, and CLSM images. Drug Delivery (2019)
26(1):107–19. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2018.1561764
36. Rami JM, Patel CD, Patel CM, Patel MV. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of
some synthesized metal oxide nanoparticles. Materials Today: Proc (2021) 43:655–9.
37. Bhattacharya S. Methotrexate-loaded polymeric lipid hybrid nanoparticles
(PLHNPs): a reliable drug delivery system for the treatment of glioblastoma. J Exp
Nanoscience (2021) 16(1):344–67. doi: 10.1080/17458080.2021.1983172
38. Kisoon N, Ariatti M, Moodley T. A novel cationic cholesterol derivative, its
formulation into liposomes, and the efﬁcient transfection of the transformed human cell
lines HepG2 and HeLa. Drug Delivery (2002) 9(3):161–7. doi: 10.1080/
15227950290097598
39. Navaeian M, Ahmadpour-Yazdi H, Asadian S, Gheibi N. The effect of ANGPTL8
protein on proliferation and apoptosis in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell line. Gene
Rep (2021) 25:101306. doi: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101306
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
19

40. Yan W, Wang T, Zhao L, Sun C. Modiﬁed DMEM xenic culture medium for
propagation, isolation and maintenance of balantioides coli. Acta Tropica (2021)
214:105762. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105762
41. Al-Rabia MW, Alhakamy NA, Rizg WY, Alghaith AF, Ahmed OAA, Fahmy UA.
Boosting curcumin activity against human prostatic cancer PC3 cells by utilizing scorpion
venom conjugated phytosomes as promising functionalized nanovesicles. Drug Delivery
(2022) 29(1):807–20. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2022.2048133
42. Liu T, Zhang J, Cao J, Zheng H, Zhan C, Liu H, et al. Identiﬁcation of coexistence of
biological and non-biological aerosol particles with DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole) stain. Particuology (2023) 72:49–57. doi: 10.1016/j.partic.2022.02.009
43. Niu J, Li C, Wu H, Feng X, Su Q, Li S, et al. Propidium iodide (PI) stains nissl
bodies and may serve as a quick marker for total neuronal cell count. Acta Histochemica
(2015) 117(2):182–7. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2014.12.001
44. Muratori C, Silkuniene G, Mollica PA, Pakhomov AG, Pakhomova ON. The role
of ESCRT-III and annexin V in the repair of cell membrane permeabilization by the
nanosecond pulsed electric ﬁeld. Bioelectrochemistry (2021) 140:107837. doi: 10.1016/
j.bioelechem.2021.107837
45. Prerana S, Ashwini P, Anupama KP, Prajna VS, Prithvisagar KS, Nayak A, et al.
Evaluation of reverse transcriptase-polymerase spiral reaction assay for rapid and
sensitive detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Clinica Chimica
Acta (2023) 539:144–50. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.12.009
46. Lv G, Shi Q, Zhang T, Li J, Long Y, Zhang W, et al. Integrating a phenotypic
screening with a structural simpliﬁcation strategy to identify 4-phenoxy-quinoline
derivatives to potently disrupt the mitotic localization of aurora kinase b. Bioorganic
Medicinal Chem (2023) 8:117173. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2023.117173
47. Zhu H, Yu J, Ye J, Wu Y, Pan J, Li Y, et al. Nanoparticle-mediated corneal
neovascularization treatments: Toward new generation of drug delivery systems. Chin
Chem Lett (2023) 34(3):107648. doi: 10.1016/j.cclet.2022.06.071
48. Cong Y, Sun Y, Deng X, Yu H, Lian X, Cong Y. A SYBR green-based real-time RT-
PCR assay to differentiate the H1N1 inﬂuenza virus lineages. J Virological Methods (2022)
300:114387. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114387
49. Zhen Z, Wei L, Zhi-fen T, Ying L, Jin-xia A, Xiao-han Y, et al. SYBR® green qPCR
screening methods for detection of anti-herbicide genes in genetically modiﬁed processed
products. J Northeast Agric Univ (English Edition) (2016) 23(1):57–64. doi: 10.1016/
S1006-8104(16)30033-2
50. Caimi G, Presti RL, Mancuso S, Siragusa S, Carlisi M. Erythrocyte deformability
proﬁle evaluated by laser diffractometry in patients with multiple myeloma: Re-
examination of our cases. Microvascular Res (2023) 146:104473. doi: 10.1016/
j.mvr.2022.104473
51. Nwizugbo KC, Ogwu MC, Eriyamremu GE, Ahana CM. Alterations in energy
metabolism, total protein, uric and nucleic acids in African sharptooth catﬁsh (Clarias
gariepinus burchell) exposed to crude oil and fractions. Chemosphere (2023) 316:137778.
doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.137778
52. Guo Y, Zhang P, Zhao Q, Wang K, Luan Y. Reduction-sensitive polymeric micelles
based on docetaxel-polymer conjugates Via disulﬁde linker for efﬁcient cancer therapy.
Macromol bioscience (2016) 16(3):420–31. doi: 10.1002/mabi.201500317
53. Buijs JT, Ünlü B, Laghmani EH, Heestermans M, van Vlijmen BJM, Versteeg HH.
Assessment of breast cancer progression and metastasis during a hypercoagulable state
induced by silencing of antithrombin in a xenograft mouse model. Thromb Res (2023)
221:51–7. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2022.11.018
54. Mehrotra N, Anees M, Tiwari S, Kharbanda S, Singh H. Polylactic acid based
polymeric nanoparticle mediated co-delivery of navitoclax and decitabine for cancer
therapy, nanomedicine: Nanotechnology. Biol Med (2023) 47:102627. doi: 10.1016/
j.nano.2022.102627
55. Ali FR, Shoaib MH, Ali SA, Yousuf RI, Siddiqui F, Raja R, et al. A nanoemulsion
based transdermal delivery of insulin: Formulation development, optimization, in-vitro
permeation across strat-m® membrane and its pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
evaluation. J Drug Delivery Sci Technol (2022) 71:103338. doi: 10.1016/j.jddst.2022.103338
56. Rodrı́guez-Hernández J. 6 - micro-/nanostructured polymer blends containing
block copolymers. In: Visakh PM, Markovic G, Pasquini D, editors. Recent developments
in polymer macro, micro and nano blends. United Kingdom: Woodhead Publishing
(2017). p. 131–61.
57. Thakur S, Chaudhary J, Singh P, Alsanie WF, Grammatikos SA, Thakur VK.
Synthesis of bio-based monomers and polymers using microbes for a sustainable
bioeconomy. Bioresource Technol (2022) 344:126156. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2021.126156
58. Alirezaei M, Ghobeh M, Es-haghi A. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)(PLGA)-based
nanoparticles modiﬁed with chitosan-folic acid to delivery of artemisia vulgaris l. essential
oil to HT-29 cancer cells. Process Biochem (2022) 121:207–15. doi: 10.1016/
j.procbio.2022.06.034
59. Zhang Y, Jiao L, Wu Z, Gu P, Feng Z, Xu S, et al. Fabrication and characterization of
Chinese yam polysaccharides PLGA nanoparticles stabilized Pickering emulsion as an efﬁcient
adjuvant. Int J Biol Macromol (2022) 209:513–24. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.04.043
60. Madkour LH. Chapter 13 - nanoparticle and polymeric nanoparticle-based
targeted drug delivery systems. In: Madkour LH, editor. Nucleic acids as gene
anticancer drug delivery therapy. Academic Press (2019). p. 191–240.
61. Sakulkhu U, Mahmoudi M, Maurizi L, Salaklang J, Hofmann H. Protein corona
composition of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with various physico-
chemical properties and coatings. Sci Rep (2014) 4(1):5020. doi: 10.1038/srep05020
62. Firouzi M, Nguyen AV. The Gibbs-marangoni stress and nonDLVO forces are
equally important for modeling bubble coalescence in salt solutions. Colloids Surfaces A:
Physicochem Eng Aspects (2017) 515:62–8. doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2016.12.004
63. Meng J, Lau CH, Xue Y, Zhang R, Cao B, Li P. Compatibilizing hydrophilic and
hydrophobic polymers via spray coating for desalination. J Materials Chem A (2020) 8
(17):8462–8. doi: 10.1039/D0TA00871K
64. Snejdrova E, Loskot J, Martiska J, Soukup T, Prokes L, Frolov V, et al. Rifampicin-
loaded PLGA nanoparticles for local treatment of musculoskeletal infections: Formulation
and characterization. J Drug Delivery Sci Technol (2022) 73:103435. doi: 10.1016/
j.jddst.2022.103435
65. Pitchika S, Sahoo SK. Paclitaxel and lapatinib dual loaded chitosan-coated PLGA
nanoparticles enhance cytotoxicity by circumventing MDR1-mediated trastuzumab
resistance in HER2 positive breast cancers: In-vitro and in-vivo studies. J Drug Delivery
Sci Technol (2022) 73:103445. doi: 10.1016/j.jddst.2022.103445
66. Oh YJ, Hong J. Application of the MTT-based colorimetric method for evaluating
bacterial growth using different solvent systems. LWT (2022) 153:112565. doi: 10.1016/
j.lwt.2021.112565
67. Al-Kinani MA, Haider AJ, Al-Musawi S. Design and synthesis of
nanoencapsulation with a new formulation of Fe@Au-CS-CU-FA NPs by pulsed laser
ablation in liquid (PLAL) method in breast cancer therapy: In vitro and In vivo.
Plasmonics (2021) 16(4):1107–17. doi: 10.1007/s11468-021-01371-3
68. Al-Kinani MA, Haider AJ, Al-Musawi S. Design, construction and characterization
of intelligence polymer coated core–shell nanocarrier for curcumin drug encapsulation
and delivery in lung cancer therapy purposes. J Inorganic Organometallic Polymers
Materials (2021) 31(1):70–9. doi: 10.1007/s10904-020-01672-w
69. Liang GF, Zhu YL, Sun B, Hu FH, Tian T, Li SC, et al. PLGA-based gene delivering
nanoparticle enhance suppression effect of miRNA in HePG2 cells. Nanoscale Res Lett
(2011) 6(1):447. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-6-447
70. Yang Q, Moulder KR, Cohen MS, Cai S, Forrest LM. Cabozantinib loaded DSPE-
PEG(2000) micelles as delivery system: Formulation, characterization and cytotoxicity
evaluation. BAOJ Pharm Sci 1 (2015) 5:001. doi: 10.24947/2380-5552/1/1/00101
71. Nie X, Liu Y, Li M, Yu X, Yuan W, Huang S, et al. SP94 peptide-functionalized PEG-
PLGA nanoparticle loading with cryptotanshinone for targeting therapy of hepatocellular
carcinoma. AAPS PharmSciTech (2020) 21(4):124. doi: 10.1208/s12249-020-01655-7
72. Yang X, Shi J, Chen X, Jiang Y, Zhao H. Efﬁcacy of cabozantinib and nivolumab in
treating hepatocellular carcinoma with RET ampliﬁcation, high tumor mutational
burden, and PD-L1 expression. oncologist (2020) 25(6):470–4. doi: 10.1634/
theoncologist.2019-0563
73. Liu Y, Piao X-J, Xu W-T, Zhang Y, Zhang T, Xue H, et al. Calycosin induces
mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, and inhibits cell migration
through a ROS-mediated signaling pathway in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Toxicol Vitro (2021) 70:105052. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2020.105052
74. SuﬁSA, Hoda M, Pajaniradje S, Mukherjee V, Coumar SM, Rajagopalan R.
Enhanced drug retention, sustained release, and anti-cancer potential of curcumin and
indole-curcumin analog-loaded polysorbate 80-stabilizied PLGA nanoparticles in colon
cancer cell line SW480. Int J Pharmaceutics (2020) 588:119738. doi: 10.1016/
j.ijpharm.2020.119738
75. Patel J, Amrutiya J, Bhatt P, Javia A, Jain M, Misra A. Targeted delivery of
monoclonal antibody conjugated docetaxel loaded PLGA nanoparticles into EGFR
overexpressed lung tumour cells. J microencapsulation (2018) 35(2):204–17. doi:
10.1080/02652048.2018.1453560
76. Devika MS, Vysakh A, Vijeesh V, Jisha N, Ruby PM. Flavonoid glycoside diosmin
induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in DLD-1 human colon cancer cell line. J Biologically
Active Products Nat (2022) 12(3):232–42. doi: 10.1080/22311866.2022.2081608
77. Abdul Mahdi S, Ali Kadhim A, Albukhaty S, Nikzad S, Haider AJ, Ibraheem S, et al.
Gene expression and apoptosis response in hepatocellular carcinoma cells induced by
biocompatible polymer/magnetic nanoparticles containing 5-ﬂuorouracil. Electronic J
Biotechnol (2021) 52:21–9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejbt.2021.04.001
78. Guimarães A, Bizerra PFV, Miranda CA, Mingatto FE. Effects of imidacloprid on
viability and increase of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in HepG2 cell line. Toxicol
Mech Methods (2022) 32(3):204–12. doi: 10.1080/15376516.2021.1992553
79. Katarzyńska-Banasik D, Grzesiak M, Sechman A. Selection of reference genes for
quantitative real-time PCR analysis in chicken ovary following silver nanoparticle
treatment. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol (2017) 56:186–90. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2017.09.011
80. Al-Musawi S, Ibraheem S, Abdul Mahdi S, Albukhaty S, Haider AJ, Kadhim AA,
et al. Smart nanoformulation based on polymeric magnetic nanoparticles and vincristine
drug: A novel therapy for apoptotic gene expression in tumors. Life (2021) 11(1):71. doi:
10.3390/life11010071
81. Liu S, Zhu P, Zhang L, Ding S, Zheng S, Wang Y, et al. Selection of reference genes
for RT-qPCR analysis in tumor tissues from male hepatocellular carcinoma patients with
hepatitis b infection and cirrhosis. Cancer Biomarkers section A Dis Markers (2013) 13
(5):345–9. doi: 10.3233/CBM-130365
Bhattacharya et al.
10.3389/fonc.2023.1125857
Frontiers in Oncology
frontiersin.org
20