Nanoparticles have been prepared by nano-emulsion templating.

•

Different dyes can be encapsulated in the nanoparticles, without varying significantly the nanoparticle properties.

•

The encapsulation efficiency achieved is notably higher than that reported in previous studies.

•

The release of the dyes from nanoparticles is slow and independent on pH and temperature.

•

Fluorescent-dye loaded nanoparticles are promising as novel intravenously administered imaging systems.

Abstract

The interest in polymeric nanoparticles as imaging systems for biomedical applications has increased notably in the last decades. In this work, PLGA nanoparticles, prepared from nano-emulsion templating, have been used to prepare novel fluorescent imaging agents. Two model fluorescent dyes were chosen and dissolved in the oil phase of the nano-emulsions together with PLGA. Nano-emulsions were prepared by the phase inversion composition (PIC) low-energy method. Fluorescent dye-loaded nanoparticles were obtained by solvent evaporation of nano-emulsion templates. PLGA nanoparticles loaded with the fluorescent dyes showed hydrodynamic radii lower than 40 nm; markedly lower than those reported in previous studies. The small nanoparticle size was attributed to the nano-emulsification strategy used. PLGA nanoparticles showed negative surface charge and enough stability to be used for biomedical imaging purposes. Encapsulation efficiencies were higher than 99%, which was also attributed to the nano-emulsification approach as well as to the low solubility of the dyes in the aqueous component. Release kinetics of both fluorescent dyes from the nanoparticle dispersions was pH-independent and sustained. These results indicate that the dyes could remain encapsulated enough time to reach any organ and that the decrease of the pH produced during cell internalization by the endocytic route would not affect their release. Therefore, it can be assumed that these nanoparticles are appropriate as systemic imaging agents. In addition, in vitro toxicity tests showed that nanoparticles are non-cytotoxic. Consequently, it can be concluded that the preparation of PLGA nanoparticles from nano-emulsion templating represents a very versatile technology that enables obtaining biocompatible, biodegradable and safe imaging agents suitable for biomedical purposes.

Graphical abstract

Schematic representation of the whole process of nanoparticle preparation from nano-emulsions templating.

Polymeric nanoparticles have received an increased attention in the last decades for a wide variety of applications [1], [2]. In the biomedical field, they have been studied for their numerous advantages as diagnostic and therapeutic nanocarriers, namely the incorporation of poorly soluble actives, the protection of the encapsulated actives and the possibility to actively vectorize them to target specific organs, thus enhancing the encapsulated compounds half-life in the body [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. In the specific context of novel imaging agents, nanoparticles could be potential biomarkers for the early diagnostic of diseases, since fluorescent markers are becoming specifically advantageous to track nanoparticles after their in vivo administration, to study, for example, cell penetration, perform biodistribution studies, target tumors and activate gene expression [1], [4], [6], [7]. Diverse compounds have been encapsulated into polymeric nanoparticles with imaging purposes, such as radioactive molecules, to track nanoparticles following the radioactivity generated; magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, to further detect polymeric nanoparticles by magnetic resonance imaging, and fluorescent probes, to follow polymeric nanoparticles by fluorescence [1], [4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. The use of fluorescence is advantageous among other strategies in terms of safety issues, provided that the selected fluorescent dye is a biocompatible and biodegradable molecule. Moreover, fluorescence detection has been confirmed to be useful to precisely determine the location of the labeled nanoparticles inside tissues and cells [12], [13], [14]. Furthermore, it has been reported that the encapsulation of fluorescent probes in nanoparticles increases their photostability [4].

The selection of the appropriate polymer and the nanoparticle preparation method are key issues, since they will determine the physico-chemical properties of the resulting polymeric nanoparticles. It is very important to select biocompatible and biodegradable components to ensure obtaining safe nanodiagnostic agents. In this context, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) accomplishes safety requirements, moreover, it has been approved by the FDA for parenteral administration [2], [15]. One interesting method for the preparation of PLGA nanoparticles is nano-emulsion templating which use a preformed polymer instead of the in situ polymerization of monomers, thus avoiding toxicity issues derived from the raw materials and/or byproducts and the consequent time consuming purification steps [16], [17], [18]. Nano-emulsions are very fine emulsions, with droplet sizes typically between 20 and 200 nm, showing high kinetic stability and transparent to translucent appearance due to their nanometric droplet sizes [18]. They can be prepared using the internal chemical energy of nano-emulsion components, the so-called low-energy emulsification methods, which produce nano-emulsions with droplet sizes that depend on the physicochemical properties of the system rather than on the mechanical energy applied. Specifically, the phase inversion composition method (PIC), is suitable for the pharmaceutical industry, since it is an easy scalable methodology that can be performed under mild conditions, such as room temperature, enabling the use of thermolabile compounds (e.g. some drugs, proteins) and mild agitation [16], [18]. The PIC method consists on the formation of nano-emulsions by inversion of the spontaneous curvature of the surfactant interfacial film, triggered by a change in the composition at constant temperature. The use of this methodology for the preparation of polymeric nanoparticles enables the formation of nanoparticles with the desired properties, as previously shown. Thus, nanoparticle size (between 20 and 150 nm), has been controlled varying the nature of the aqueous phase of the template nano-emulsions [19], [20]; nanoparticle surface charge has been tuned by using surfactant mixtures with different charges and lipophilic compounds have been encapsulated with a high encapsulation efficiency [19].

The novelty of this work arises from the design of novel PLGA nanoparticles, from nano-emulsion templating, using the PIC method, as a versatile platform for the nanoencapsulation of desired fluorescent dyes.

2. Experimental section

2.1. Materials

Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid), Resomer 752H (PLGA) (polystyrene equivalent molecular weight PSE − MW ∼ 10,000 g/mol, determined by Gel Permeation Chromathography) was purchased from Boehringer Ingelheim. The PLGA lactic to glycolic acid ratio was 75/25 and the end groups were free-carboxylic acids. Ethyl acetate and ethanol used as the organic volatile solvents were purchased from Merck. Polysorbate 80 was kindly provided by Croda. Coumarin 6 (Fig. 1a) (C6; MW = 350 g/mol) and Rhodamine 6G (Fig. 1b) (Rho6G; MW = 479 g/mol) were purchased at Sigma-Adrich. Salts for the phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 0.16 M, pH = 7.4, 300mOsm/kg): sodium chloride (NaCl), Disodium monohydrogenphosphate dihydrate (Na2HPO4·H2O) and Sodium dihydrogenphosphate monohydrate (NaH2PO4·H2O) were purchased from Merck. Water was MilliQ filtered (Millipore). Amicon Ultra-15C Centrifugal Filter Unit of Ultracell-3 Regenerated Cellullose Membranes with a molecular weight cut-off of 3 kDa were purchased from Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA. Spectra/Por® molecular porous (MWCO of 12–14 kDa) membrane tubing was purchased from Spectral Medical Industries, Inc., California, USA. For cell culture experiments, cells were kindly provided by collaborators and cellular media was purchased from Gibco.

2.2. Methods

2.2.1. Solubility of fluorescent dyes

The solubility of Coumarin 6 and Rhodamine 6G in diverse aqueous and organic solvents was assessed by visual observation of the dissolution of both fluorescent dyes in the studied solvent, after their stabilization in a bath at 25 °C. Briefly, around 15 g of the solvent were weighted, and increasing amounts of the fluorescent dye were gradually added (from 0.5 mg up to the saturation concentration). After each addition, samples were stirred and the visual macroscopic appearance was observed. The limit of solubility was assessed when the sample turned translucent from transparent or some dye aggregates appeared. Each experiment was performed, at least, three times; and results are given as a mean value.

2.2.2. Nano-emulsion preparation by the PIC method

O/W nano-emulsions were prepared using the phase inversion composition method (PIC), at 25 °C, by stepwise addition of aqueous phase to mixtures of surfactant and oil, as previously described [19]. The selected nano-emulsion system was: PBS 0.16 M (W)/polysorbate 80 (S)/[4 wt% PLGA + “x” wt% fluorescent dye in organic solvent] (O), being “x” the percentage of Coumarin 6 or Rhodamine 6G. The organic solvent was ethyl acetate or a mixture of ethanol/ethyl acetate 20/80 v/v.

2.2.3. Nanoparticle preparation by solvent evaporation

Nanoparticle dispersions were prepared from the nano-emulsions by solvent evaporation under reduced pressure, using a Büchi R–215 V Rotavapor. The conditions for ethyl acetate and ethanol evaporation from about 4 g of nano-emulsion at 25 °C temperature were: vacuum of 43mbars with a rotation speed of 150 rpm during 45 min, in order to ensure a residual solvent content below 5000 ppm.

2.2.4. Determination of droplet and nanoparticle sizes

The mean droplet size and size distribution of nano-emulsions and nanoparticles were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a 3D cross correlation multiple-scattering spectrometer (LS Instruments) equipped with a He-Ne laser (632.8 nm) at a scattering angle of 90°, and at a constant temperature of 25 °C in triplicates. Data were treated by cumulant analysis [27]. The characterization was performed by the Nanostructured Liquid Characterization Unit of the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) and the Biomedical Networking Center (CIBER-BBN), located at the Institute of Advanced Chemistry of Catalonia, of the Spanish Research Council (IQAC-CSIC).

2.2.5. Determination of surface charge

The surface charge of the nanoparticles was assessed by Electrophoretic mobility measurements at 25 °C with a Zetasizer NanoZS instrument (Malvern Co. Ltd., UK), equipped with a He-Ne laser (λ = 633 nm). The zeta potential (ζ) was calculated from the electrophoretic mobility applying a modification of the Smoluchowski equation (Hückel-Onsager equation: Eq. (1))[28]:(1)μ = (ζ × εr × ϵ0)/ηwhere εr represents the relative dielectric constant of water, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and η is the viscosity of the liquid. As this equation is only valid if the mobility is low, samples were diluted 1:20 with distilled water.

2.2.6. Nano-emulsion and nanoparticle stability

Nano-emulsion and nanoparticles stability was determined both, by visual observation of the macroscopic appearance (they were considered stable until a sediment appeared), and also by measuring droplet and nanoparticle hydrodynamic radii; both as a function of time, at 25 °C. At least three replicates of each sample were measured.

2.2.7. Fluorescence measurements

Fluorescent emission was quantified using a Cary Eclipse Fluorescence Spectrophotometer (Varian). Coumarin 6 (C6) was excited at 444 nm and its maximum emission peak was around 525 nm. Rhodamine 6G (Rho6G) was excited at 530 nm and has a maximum fluorescence peak around 570 nm. Fluorescence emission data were transformed to concentrations by means of calibration curves (detection limit 10−4 mg/mL).

It is worth noting that polysorbate 80 enhances C6 fluorescence, but this effect was taken into account and C6 release quantification was normalized for initial fluorescent values. The normalization consisted on the measurement of a solution of polysorbate 80 at the concentration used in the samples, without C6, and this value was taken as the zero fluorescence (subtracted from all the signals). After this background subtraction, the fluorescence properties of both dye-loaded nanoparticles were the same as those of free dyes (see Fig. S1, SI).

2.2.8. FTIR spectroscopy

Fourier Transform Infra-Red (FTIR) spectrometer Nicolet model 510 was used to measure the transmission of the samples as a function of the wave number from 390 to 3900 cm−1 (Pretsch, 2003). Samples were compressed to solid pellets mixing the sample with potassium bromide (KBr). Spectra from the transmittance/absorbance data were recorder and further processed.

2.2.9. Encapsulation efficiency

The efficiency of fluorescent dyes encapsulation in the nanoparticle dispersion was determined by centrifuging fluorescent dye-loaded nanoparticles using centrifugal filter units with a molecular weight cut-off of 3 kDa (Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracell-3 Membrane, Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) and analyzing the filtrate by fluorescence measurement. The centrifugation was carried out at 2,300g during 75 min at 25 °C. The fluorescent dyes encapsulation efficiency (EE) was obtained using Eq. (2)[29], [30].(2)

2.2.10. Release experiments

Release experiments were performed in vitro by the dialysis bag method [31] using Float-A-Lyzer® G2 Dialysis Device MCWO of 3.5–5 kDa porous cellulose ester bags (SpectrumLabs®, Inc., California, USA,). Release of fluorescent dyes from an aqueous solution, a micellar solution and from nanoparticle dispersions was determined using about 2 g of sample filled in Float-A-Lyzers® and submerged in 50 mL of PBS 0.16 M (receptor solution), under continuous stirring. Sink conditions were accomplished for both dyes during the performance of the dialysis. The pH of the receptor solution was set at 7.4 and 4.0 to study the pH influence on the release. The diffusion cells consisted of cylindrical thermojacketed glass vessels connected to a water bath at 25 °C or 37 °C and covered, to avoid loss of the receptor solution due to evaporation [31]. These vessels were also protected from light to avoid photodegradation of the fluorescent dyes. The assays were performed for about twelve days. Periodically, 50 μL aliquots of the sample were withdrawn to quantify the amount of delivered fluorescent dye. Fluorescent dye quantification was performed as described in Section 2.2.7.

2.2.11. In vitro cytotoxicity studies

HeLa and SH-SY5Y cells, used for the in vitro experiments, were grown in 96-well plates at an initial density of 6000 cells per well in 200 μL of growth medium for 24 h. The growth medium consists on Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10 wt.% FBS (fetal bovine serum) for HeLa cells and 15 wt.% FBS for SH-SY5Y cells. Cells were washed just before experimentation, and incubated with nanoparticles at a NP concentration of 3 mg/mL and 0.3 mg/mL. After 4 h of incubation at 37 °C, the medium containing the incubated samples was removed and replaced by growth medium.

The metabolic activity of the cells was measured after 18 h using the MTT test (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide); to determine the cytotoxic effect of nanoparticles [31]. 25 μL of MTT at a concentration of 5 mg/mL in PBS were added directly in each well and cells were incubated 2 additional hours. Then, 100 μL of DMSO were added. After 15 min incubation, absorbance was measured at 560 nm wavelength on microplate ELISA reader (SpectraMax M5 luminometer, Molecular devices). Results were expressed as a relative percentage to control cells [32], [33].

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Formation and characterization of fluorescent dye-loaded nano-emulsions

The solubility of the lipophilic fluorescent dyes in the aqueous (water, PBS 0.16M) and organic solvents (ethyl acetate, ethanol, acetone) was determined prior to the preparation of nano-emulsions and nanoparticles. The results are shown in Table 1. Coumarin 6 was insoluble in water and in PBS 0.16M, while its solubility in the organic solvents tested was higher. The highest solubility was found in ethyl acetate, which is advantageous for its encapsulation in the oil droplets of the template nano-emulsion. In contrast, the solubility of Rhodamine 6G in ethyl acetate was low, but it was highly soluble in ethanol. For this reason, a mixture of ethanol and ethyl acetate was used as the solvent for this fluorescent dye.

Table 1. Solubility of C6 and Rho6G in aqueous and organic solvents as assessed visually at 25 °C. The expression “<detection limit” indicates that the solubility of the dye was lower than the one that can be assessed visually (<0.0001 mg/mL).

Empty Cell

Empty Cell

Solubility (mg/mL)

Empty Cell

Empty Cell

Coumarin 6

Rhodamine 6G

Aqueous solvents

Water

<detection limit

2.09 ± 0.28

PBS 0.16 M

<detection limit

0.33 ± 0.01

Organic solvents

Ethyl acetate

3.98 ± 0.28

<0.001

Ethanol

0.14 ± 0.02

42.38 ± 5.27

Acetone

0.31 ± 0.04

0.15 ± 0.00

Fluorescent dye-loaded nano-emulsions were prepared in the system: PBS 0.16 M (W)/polysorbate 80 (S)/[4 wt% PLGA + 0.1 wt% fluorescent dye in organic solvent] (O); where the organic solvent was ethyl acetate and 20/80 v/v ethanol/ethyl acetate for the encapsulation of C6 and Rho6G, respectively. Based on previous studies [20], nano-emulsions with an O/S ratio of 70/30, and 90 wt% aqueous phase were used. The properties of fluorescent-loaded nano-emulsions, (abbreviated as NE(C6) and NE(Rho6G)) are shown in Table 2 and compared with those of the corresponding non-loaded nano-emulsions (data already published by Fornaguera et al., in [20], [34]). Non-loaded nano-emulsions formulated with ethyl acetate are abbreviated as NE(E) while those with 20/80 ethanol/ethyl acetate are termed NE(A).

Table 2. Hydrodynamic radii (nm), surface charge (mV) and stability (time to sediment) of C6-loaded nano-emulsions − NE(C6) − and Rho6G-loaded nano-emulsions − NE(Rho6G), loaded with 0.1 wt% of the fluorescent dye in the oil phase. Non-loaded nano-emulsions NE(E), formulated with ethyl acetate, and NE(A), formulated with 20/80 v/v ethanol/ethyl acetate, are presented for comparative purposes.

Empty Cell

NE(C6)

NE(E)

NE(Rho6G)

NE(A)

Visual appearance

Hydrodynamic radii (nm)

34.28 ± 0.97

40.91 ± 3.27

51.11 ± 0.78

37.59 ± 2.43

Surface charge (mV)

−47.05 ± 1.42

−38.14 ± 2.53

−39.03 ± 2.72

−38.70 ± 1.36

Stability (time to sediment)

19 days

16.5 days

≥20 days

15 days

The incorporation of the dyes did not modify the transparency of the nano-emulsions, although they acquired the characteristic color of each dye: yellowish shine for Coumarin 6 (C6) and orange-pinkish for Rhodamine 6G (Rho6G).

The encapsulation of the fluorescent dyes resulted in a slight reduction of size in NE(C6) while it increased slightly in NE(Rho6G). These results are in good agreement with previous studies, which indicated a dependence of nano-emulsion droplet sizes on the nano-emulsion components, composition and presence of additives such as encapsulating compounds [17], [34], [35]. Nano-emulsion droplet radii were around 34 nm for NE(C6) and around 51 nm for NE(Rho6G). The non-loaded nano-emulsions showed a size around 40 nm, independently on the presence – NE(A) – or absence – NE(E) – of ethanol. Therefore, the size increase when Rho6G was encapsulated cannot be attributed to the ethanol but to the fluorescent dye.

As expected, nano-emulsion surface charge was negative, due to the carboxylic groups of the PLGA polymer and with similar values (around −39 mV) to those reported in previous studies [36], [37], [38]. However, when C6 was encapsulated, the surface charge reached −47 mV, which was attributed to the properties of the C6 molecule as found in previous C6 encapsulation studies [25].

Non-loaded and loaded nano-emulsions were found stable by visual observation for a period of 15–20 days, after which a sediment appeared. NE(Rho6G) were slightly more stable. The sediments of dye-loaded nano-emulsions were colored, showing the respective color of the fluorescent dye. Therefore, the sediment was attributed to an early nanoparticle formation that tends to sediment, as observed for non-loaded nano-emulsions. Considering that the major component of nano-emulsion oil internal phase (ethyl acetate or ethyl acetate/ethanol mixtures) are partially water soluble, a diffusion of these solvents to the continuous aqueous phase was expected, even evaporation due to their volatile character, thus giving rise to a reduction in nano-emulsion droplet size and to an early formation of nanoparticles.

The stability of NE(C6) and NE(Rho6G) was also assessed by the variations of the hydrodynamic droplet radii as a function of time (Fig. 2). For NE(C6), droplet sizes decreased from around 35 nm to 28 nm for the first 5 days, and afterwards droplet sizes were unchanged, for the experimental measurement time, 40 days. For NE(Rho6G), NE droplet radii decreased from around 51 nm to 40 nm for the first 5 days and after this time, the size decrease continued although it was less pronounced, reaching sizes around 40 nm after 40 days. The initial reduction in droplet size could be attributed to the diffusion of the solvent to the continuous phase. The slight decrease of NE(Rho6G) droplet size, as compared to the practically constant NE(C6) droplet size can be attributed to the higher solubility of Rho6G and ethanol (as compared to C6 and ethyl acetate) in PBS, thus favoring its diffusion to the continuous phase with the consequent decrease in droplet size.

3.2. Preparation and characterization of polymeric fluorescent dye-loaded nanoparticles

The stability of all nano-emulsions was long enough to enable their use as nanoparticle templates, since the solvent evaporation process to obtain nanoparticles requires around 1 h. Therefore, PLGA nanoparticles, loaded with C6 or Rho6G, abbreviated as NP(C6) and NP(Rho6G) respectively, were prepared as described in Section 2.2.3. As expected, after solvent evaporation, nanoparticle dispersions maintained the transparency and the characteristic color of the template nano-emulsions (Table 3). NP(C6) showed hydrodynamic radii of around 24 nm, while that of NP(Rho6G) was around 38 nm. The size of both fluorescent dye-loaded nanoparticles was slightly higher than the corresponding non-loaded nanoparticles, abbreviated as NP(E) and NP(A) (Table 3). Surface charges were negative, independently of the loading. In contrast, nanoparticles formed from nano-emulsions with only ethyl acetate as organic solvent, NP(E) and NP(C6), experienced a decrease in the absolute value of surface charge with respect to their template nano-emulsions NE(A) and NE(Rho6G). The surface charges of nanoparticles formulated from nano-emulsions with the mixture of ethyl acetate and ethanol as the organic solvent were similar. Therefore, the presence of ethanol resulted in less drastic changes of nanoparticle properties as compared to their template nano-emulsions: small size reduction and low decrease in absolute surface charge (Table 2, Table 3).

Table 3. Hydrodynamic radii (nm), surface charge (mV) and stability (time to sediment) of C6-loaded nanoparticles, NP(C6), and Rho6G-loaded nanoparticles, NP(Rho6G). The data on the corresponding non-loaded nanoparticles NP(E), and NP(A), are presented for comparative purposes. The fluorescent dye concentration in the oil phase of the template nano-emulsions was 0.1 wt%.

Empty Cell

NP(C6)

NP(E)

NP(Rho6G)

NP(A)

Visual appearance

Hydrodynamic radii (nm)

23.71 ± 0.82

20.24 ± 1.78

38.32 ± 1.42

34.33 ± 0.98

Surface charge (mV)

−14.83 ± 3.77

−18.90 ± 2.24

−37.03 ± 6.02

−36.60 ± 5.24

Stability (time to sediment)

24 days

>90 days

>90 days

>90 days

Nanoparticle macroscopic visual stability was considerably higher than that of the template nano-emulsions, except for NP(C6). A higher stability of NP(C6) nanoparticle dispersions was expected, since they are smaller, thus reducing the gravitational destabilization force and also because destabilization mechanisms common in liquid–liquid dispersions (e.g. coalescence) do not apply on nanoparticle dispersions. The higher stability of nanoparticles as compared to nano-emulsions of a similar hydrodynamic size was previously described [20]. The striking lower stability of C6-loaded nanoparticles is not easy to interpret. It could be attributed to a different behavior of C6 as compared to Rho6G when encapsulated in the nano-emulsions and nanoparticles.

The stability of NP(C6) and NP(Rho6G) was also assessed by measuring hydrodynamic radii as a function of time. Both types of nanoparticles, NP(C6) and NP(Rho6G) experienced very slight variations in size (Fig. 3), remaining practically constant (around 25 nm and 38 nm, respectively) during the experimental time of 40 days.

These results showed that nano-emulsions and nanoparticles can be prepared encapsulating these dyes at the concentration chosen (0.1 wt% in the oil nano-emulsion phase). They also showed the nano-emulsion template effect. Previous bibliography reported the production of PLGA nanoparticles without and with C6, where the hydrodynamic diameter remained unchanged, around 270 nm [6]. However, in other studies, the incorporation of C6 in PLGA-PEG nanoparticles produced an increase in nanoparticle diameter from 95 to 120 nm [39]. The controversy between different studies could be due to the nanoparticle preparation methodology. In both studies, nanoparticles were prepared by solvent evaporation from multiple emulsion templating. While Panyam et al. [6] used exactly the same methodology to prepare non-loaded and loaded nanoparticles, Hu et al., [39] added a purification step by column chromatography only to the C6-loaded nanoparticles, which could be the cause of the nanoparticle size changes when adding the fluorescent dye. In the present study, the same protocol was followed for the preparation of non-loaded and loaded nanoparticles. It is worth noting that nanoparticle sizes achieved in the present study are markedly smaller than those reported in previous literature for non-loaded and both C6 and Rho6G-loaded PLGA nanoparticles [6], [24], [25], [26], [39], which was attributed to the nano-emulsification approach used [18]. The smaller size could be an advantage, for example, for the intravenous administration in terms of reduced immune system activation, since smaller nanoparticles are less detected by the complement system and, consequently, less phagocited [16], [40], [41], [42].

3.3. Encapsulation efficiency of the fluorescent dyes

The efficiency of C6 and Rho6G encapsulation was assessed by means of the indirect filtration − centrifugation method. This method has the advantage that the results can be qualitatively tested by visual observation. The filtrate obtained was colorless, thus suggesting the absence of the dye (Fig. S2, SI). Fluorescent measurements confirmed the visual observations, as no fluorescent signal was found in the filtrate thus indicating that encapsulation of both fluorescent dyes was almost complete. However, the low fluorescent signal could be due to a concentration of fluorescent dyes under the limit of detection. To rule out this hypothesis, FTIR determinations were performed. The FTIR spectrum for the filtrate of NP(C6) dispersion clearly differs from those of NP(C6) dispersion and C6 aqueous solution (Fig. 4). As expected, the C6 aqueous solution showed peaks at around 1000, 1600 and 2750 cm−1, which correspond, respectively, to the vibrations of the following groups: COC ether of the C6 molecule, CO of the same aromatic ring and multiple CH2 and CH3 groups present in this molecule. These peaks also appeared in the NP(C6), thus confirming the presence of C6 in the nanoparticles. In the filtrate of NP(C6) dispersion, the most remarkable feature is the absence of the peak around 2750 cm−1 attributed to the C6 molecule. Although the peaks corresponding to COC and CO groups appeared, they were attributed to the surfactant excess. In addition, the peaks between 1000 and 1600 cm−1 which correspond also to the C6 molecule (Fig. S3, SI), were only found in NP(C6) and the aqueous C6 solution.

The high encapsulation degree achieved in this work is attributed to the nano-emulsion templating approach, as we previously reported for drug encapsulation [19], [34]. Since C6 and Rho6G are dissolved in the oil component, prior to nano-emulsion formation, they are confined in the dispersed (oil) phase of the nano-emulsion. When the solvent is evaporated, a process leading to nanoparticle formation, the fluorescent dyes remain entrapped in the polymeric nanoparticle matrix, due to their low water solubility (Table 1). This could also explain the high C6 encapsulation efficiencies obtained by Zhang et al., [26] from 60 to 90 wt% using W/O/W template emulsions and also by Betancourt et al., [24] around 89 wt% of Rho6G encapsulation from O/W template emulsions, whose nanoparticles showed sizes of around 150 nm. However, in another study by Trapani et al., [25], where nanoparticles with sizes around 340 nm were produced by ultrasounds, C6 encapsulation efficiencies reached values only up to 30 wt%, which could be attributed to the bigger sizes of these nanoparticles.

3.4. Release of the fluorescent dyes

Release of C6 and Rho6G from nanoparticles was performed at 25 °C and 37 °C (room and human body temperatures, respectively) by means of the dialysis bag method and fluorescence detection (as described in Section 2.2.9) using PBS as the receptor solution, at neutral (pH = 7.4) and acid (pH = 4.0) pH values to simulate the pH of different cell compartments [6]. Although the nanoparticle mechanism of cell penetration was not studied in this work, it seems to be agreement that nanoparticles usually penetrate cells by different kinds of endocytosis [6]. By the endocytic pathway, nanoparticles would be engulfed by the endosomes, initially at a neutral pH. Then, during the endocytic pathway, the pH gradually decreases, reaching acidic pH values around 4.5 [6].

The percentage of C6 and Rho6G released from NP(C6) and NP(Rho6G), respectively, as a function of time at both pH values and at both temperatures, are shown in Fig. 5 (and also in Fig. S4 from SI, with the same time-scale, for comparative purposes). The release profile for each dye was pH and temperature independent. Around 60 wt% of C6 had already been released during the first hour. However, after this period of time, the release was more sustained; achieving 80–100 wt% of C6 release after 6 h, at 25 and 37 °C respectively, where a plateau was reached and no more C6 was released up to the whole experimental time. In contrast, Rho6G release was more sustained: only 25 wt% of Rho6G had been released within the first hour at 25 °C and slightly lower at the 37 °C, where the burst release was maintained up to around 6 h. After this time, the release was more sustained, achieving an almost complete release after 200 h (8 days). Although the Rho6G released between 24 h and 72 h seemed to be slightly lower when the pH of the receptor solution is neutral, these differences cannot be attributed to an effect of the pH, since neither the fluorescent dye nor the PLGA show pH dependent properties at this pH range. The slower initial release of Rho6G as compared to C6 could be attributed to the smaller size of NP(C6), as compared to NP(Rho6G). In addition, interactions between Rho6G not only with the PLGA polymer, but also with polysorbate 80 surfactant molecules could be hypothesized. Previous studies showed that the smaller the particle size, the faster the release of the encapsulated compounds, which could be explained by the higher surface/volume [43] ratio of the smaller particles. Although the C6 release profile obtained here was quite similar to those reported in the bibliography (an initial burst followed by a slow release), most studies found a C6 release of around 1 wt% after 8 h from polymeric nanoparticles [38], namely PLGA nanoparticles [25], [26]. The differences between the C6 slow release from previous studies and the C6 faster release from the present study could be attributed to the smaller size of nanoparticles of the present work.

The above results confirmed that the pH neither the temperature of the environment (receptor solution) did not influence C6 and Rho6G release from nanoparticles. Moreover, since both, C6 and Rho6G can be detected after 24 h, at 37 °C, of being in contact with an acidic pH, it can be concluded that they remain intact, thus confirming the suitability of these nanoparticles as advanced fluorescent imaging agents.

Concerning Rho6G, few studies were found in previous bibliography that aimed to study the encapsulation and release of Rho6G in PLGA nanoparticles [24], [44]. Zhou et al., [44] reported the Rho6G release from PLGA cationic nanoparticles of around 300 nm, also prepared by emulsion templating, being nano-emulsions prepared by ultrasonication; studied a pH = 7.4 and pH = 4.0. In contrast to our study, they found a remarkable difference between the release at both pH values: while almost all Rho6G had been released within 4 days, at pH = 4.0, only 50% of Rho6G had been released within 7 days, at pH = 7.4 [44]. The differences with the present work could be attributed to the differences in the nanoparticles surface charge and size of both studies. Zhou et al., [44] also found an initial burst Rho6G release, followed by a very sustained and slow release that reached only 30% after 30 days. Although Zhou et al., also prepared PLGA nanoparticles, the differences of this study with the present one could be attributed to the sizes and the cationic nature of their nanoparticles together with the crosslinks in the polymeric matrix, which could enhance the formation of a denser polymeric matrix not enabling the release of the dye.

In the study of Betancourt et al., the surfactant used and the method of nanoparticle preparation in both studies is different: Betancourt et al. prepared PLGA nanoparticles by nanoprecipitation, using bovine serum albumin (BSA). The method of nanoparticles preparation could influence Rho6G release, but a contribution of the surfactant could be also hypothesized, as discussed above, which retains the Rho6G even in the micellar solution (Fig. 5).

Therefore, the reason why previous bibliography [24], [25], [26] reported slower release kinetics is that they used nanoparticles with sizes of at least one and a half order of magnitude higher than those obtained in this work, and consequently more amount of fluorescent dye should be encapsulated per a single particle. In our case, in contrast, if fewer molecules are encapsulated in a higher number of nanoparticles, the release could be facilitated.

Since the release from NP(Rho6G) was slower than that of NP(C6); it was compared with those from aqueous and micellar Rho6G solutions, at pH = 7.4 and 25 °C (Fig. 5b), in order to rule out possible interactions of the dye with the dialysis membrane. The release from the micellar solution, similar to that of NP(Rho6G), was sustained and took around 250 h (10 days) to be completed. The initial burst release followed by a slower release in both samples can be attributed to a fraction of Rho6G molecules located at the nanoparticle or micelle surface, and to another fraction of Rho6G molecules entrapped in the nanoparticle or micelle core, respectively. As expected, the release from the aqueous solution was fast and completed within 20 h; faster than those from the micellar solution and nanoparticle dispersions; thus ruling out eventual interactions with the dialysis membrane. However, it was expected a more sustained release when Rho6G was encapsulated in the nanoparticles, but its release was very similar to that of Rho6G from micelles. This would confirm the hypothesis of a possible interaction between Rho6G and polysorbate 80 surfactant molecules.

Since fluorescent dye-loaded nanoparticles were designed with imaging purposes, the fluorescent dye should remain encapsulated in the nanoparticles for sufficient time to allow following their biodistribution. After the first hour, 60 wt% of C6 and around 10 wt% of Rho6G were released at 37 °C (Fig. 5c and d). However, it takes only around 10 min after intravenous administration in mice for a blood cell to return to the starting point after circulating around the whole blood stream [45]. Thus, the time that a dye-loaded nanoparticle requires to reach a target organ is lower than the time (one hour) required starting noticing a remarkable fluorescent dye release, in the case of C6, where a faster release was found. Therefore, it can be predicted that most of C6 and Rho6G would remain encapsulated in PLGA nanoparticles when they reach the target organs after intravenous administration, thus allowing their correct localization and ensuring their suitability as bioimaging systems for in vivo applications.

3.5. In vitro cytotoxicity of nanoparticles

The cytotoxicity of fluorescent-dye loaded nanoparticles was studied by means of the MTT test, in cell cultures of HeLa cells, which were selected as a proof-of-concept and SH-SY5Y cells, which were selected as another example of more sensitive neuroblastoma cells. Fig. 6 shows the percentage of cell viability after incubation of these cells with NP(C6) and NP(Rho6G) at the as-prepared concentration (3 mg/mL) and diluted 1:10. The viability of HeLa cells (Fig. 6a) is higher than 75% independently of nanoparticle loading; therefore, these nanoparticles are non-cytotoxic in HeLa cells. However, when the same experiments were performed on SH-SY5Y cells, their viability decreased when they were incubated with the as-prepared nanoparticle concentrations (3 mg/mL), resulting in mortalities as high as 50% (Fig. 6b). Nevertheless, when the nanoparticle concentration was reduced down to 0.3 mg/mL, the viability of SH-SY5Y cells increased up to 90%; thus, independently of the loaded fluorescent dye, nanoparticles are non-cytotoxic for this cell line at 0.3 mg/mL polymer concentration.

These results are in good agreement with previous in vitro studies of PLGA nanoparticles encapsulating these fluorescent dyes, where non-cytotoxic effects were found in different cell culture lines, at equivalent nanoparticle concentrations [5], [39]. To ensure a safe diagnostic nanocarrier for a systemic administration, these designed nanoparticles should be used at concentration up to 0.3 mg/mL, but this low polymer concentration does not represent a drawback, since at this polymer concentration, fluorescent emission is very high, comparable to that of the free dye (see Fig. S1, SI), and therefore, the fluorescence of dye-loaded nanoparticles is enough to use them as imaging agents.

Therefore, the sustained and controlled release, together with the biocompatibility and the long-blood half-life expected for these nanoparticles, discussed in one of our previous articles reporting the interaction of PLGA nanoparticles with blood components [46], make these PLGA nanoparticles advantageous as nanocarriers for imaging purposes.

8. Conclusions

In this study, the preparation of nanoparticles from nano-emulsion templating (by the PIC low-energy emulsification method) is presented as a versatile technology to obtain nanosystems for imaging purposes in biomedical applications. To demonstrate the versatility of this methodology, two fluorescent dyes have been encapsulated in PLGA nanoparticles, Coumarin 6 and Rhodamine 6G. PLGA nanoparticles with small nanometric sizes (<40 nm), negative surface charge (around −15 and −35 mV, respectively) and stability of at least one month have been obtained. Encapsulation efficiencies higher than 99% have been achieved. The fluorescent dye release was sustained and independent of the pH and the temperature of the receptor solution. In addition, these nanoparticles are non-cytotoxic at tested concentrations (0.3 mg/mL). Therefore, the fluorescent dye loaded PLGA nanoparticles designed in the present work represent promising novel nanosystems, advantageous for long-term imaging purposes in biomedical applications, where there is still a need to develop such type of nanocarriers.

Disclosure

C. Fornaguera performed half of the experimental part and wrote the manuscript.

N. Feiner-Gracia performed half of the experimental part and helped to write the draft of the manuscript.

G. Calderó supervised some experimental part and revised the manuscript.

M.J. García-Celma supervised some experimental part and revised the manuscript.

C. Solans was in charge of the coordination of all experimental research and correction of the manuscript.

All authors have approved the final manuscript and agree to submit it to Colloids and Surfaces B Journal.

Acknowledgments

Financial support from MINECO (grant CTQ2014-52687); Generalitat de Catalunya (grant 2014-SGR-1655), and CIBER-BBN are acknowledged. CIBER-BBN is an initiative funded by the Spanish National Plan for Scientific and Technical Research and Innovation 2013–2016, Iniciativa Ingenio 2010, Consolider Program, CIBER Actions are financed by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III with assistance from the European Regional Development Fund. Cristina Fornaguera is grateful to AGAUR for their Predoctoral Fellowship (grant FI-DGR 2012). Natalia Feiner is grateful to CIBER-BBN for their Research Initiation Grant. Authors acknowledge Aurora Dols for her kind support in the preparation of some experiments, Alba Ortega for her kind support in part of the experiments and Marta Monge for her kind support in some cell cultures preparation.

L.H. Reddy, R.K. Sharma, K. Chuttani, A.K. Mishra, R.M. Murthy

Etoposide-incorporated tripalmitin nanoparticles with different surface charge: formulation, characterization, radiolabeling, and biodistribution studies

S.J. Lee, J.R. Jeong, S.C. Shin, J.C. Kim, Y.H. Chang, Y.M. Chang, J.D.D. Kim

Nanoparticles of magnetic ferric oxides encapsulated with poly(D,L lactide-co-glycolide) and their applications to magnetic resonance imaging contrast agent

J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 272–276 (3) (2004), pp. 2432-2433

C. Fornaguera, S. Grijalvo, M. Galán, E. Fuentes-Paniagua, F.J. de la Mata, R. Gómez, R. Eritja, G. Calderó, C. Solans

Novel non-viral gene delivery systems composed of carbosilane dendron functionalized nanoparticles prepared from nano-emulsions as non-viral carriers for antisense oligonucleotides

To date, microspheres fabricated using the FDA-approved material poly (D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) have exhibited excellent encapsulation of therapeutic proteins/peptides and long-acting behavior, leading to PLGA receiving a considerable amount of medical and pharmaceutical attention. Despite the good biodegradability and biocompatibility of PLGA microspheres, however (Chen et al., 2017; Fornaguera et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017; Qiao et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2017), the effective encapsulation of protein drugs into this polymer matrix remains challenging. Specifically, PLGA degradation causes lactic acid (LA) and glycolic acid (GA) to accumulate inside the microspheres, and the resulting decrease in the microenvironmental pH causes protein drugs aggregate, degrade and denature.

Among commonly used polymers, PLGA is one of the excipients approved by the Food and Drug Administration for human use in therapeutic devices. Although PLGA microspheres have been intensively investigated in the medical and pharmaceutical fields due to great biocompatibility and biodegradability [8–12], effectively encapsulating protein drugs into the polymer matrix and minimizing the initial burst still remain challenging. The W/O/W double emulsion technique is commonly used to formulate PLGA microspheres due to its simple and rapid preparation procedure [13].

Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Solubility (mg/mL)
Empty Cell	Empty Cell	Coumarin 6	Rhodamine 6G
Aqueous solvents	Water	<detection limit	2.09 ± 0.28
PBS 0.16 M	<detection limit	0.33 ± 0.01
Organic solvents	Ethyl acetate	3.98 ± 0.28	<0.001
Ethanol	0.14 ± 0.02	42.38 ± 5.27
Acetone	0.31 ± 0.04	0.15 ± 0.00

Empty Cell	NE(C6)	NE(E)	NE(Rho6G)	NE(A)
Visual appearance
Hydrodynamic radii (nm)	34.28 ± 0.97	40.91 ± 3.27	51.11 ± 0.78	37.59 ± 2.43
Surface charge (mV)	−47.05 ± 1.42	−38.14 ± 2.53	−39.03 ± 2.72	−38.70 ± 1.36
Stability (time to sediment)	19 days	16.5 days	≥20 days	15 days

Empty Cell	NP(C6)	NP(E)	NP(Rho6G)	NP(A)
Visual appearance
Hydrodynamic radii (nm)	23.71 ± 0.82	20.24 ± 1.78	38.32 ± 1.42	34.33 ± 0.98
Surface charge (mV)	−14.83 ± 3.77	−18.90 ± 2.24	−37.03 ± 6.02	−36.60 ± 5.24
Stability (time to sediment)	24 days	>90 days	>90 days	>90 days