PLGA nanoparticles for oral delivery of cyclosporine: Nephrotoxicity and
pharmacokinetic studies in comparison to Sandimmune Neoral®☆
J.L. Italia a,b, D.K. Bhatt c, V. Bhardwaj a, K. Tikoo c, M.N.V. Ravi Kumar a,b,⁎
a Department of Pharmaceutics, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), SAS Nagar-160062, Punjab, India
b Centre for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, (NIPER), SAS Nagar-160062, Punjab, India
c Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, (NIPER), SAS Nagar-160062, Punjab, India
Received 7 September 2006; accepted 7 February 2007
Available online 14 February 2007
Abstract
The cyclosporine-loaded poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles (NPs) were prepared by the emulsion–diffusion–evaporation
method and were optimized for particle size and entrapment efficiency. The optimized particles were 143.3±8.7 nm in size with narrow size
distribution and 71.9±1.7% entrapment efficiency at 20% w/w initial drug loading when prepared with 0.1% w/v of Didodecylmethylammonium
bromide (DMAB) as stabilizer. These particulate carriers exhibited controlled in vitro release of cyclosporine for 23 days at a nearly constant rate
and showed very good hemocompatibility in vitro. The nanoparticulate formulation showed significantly higher intestinal uptake as compared to
Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine suspension. The relative bioavailability of nanoparticulate formulation was found to be 119.2% as
compared to Sandimmune Neoral®. A marked difference in the pharmacokinetic profile between nanoparticulate and Sandimmune Neoral®
formulations was observed where nanoparticulate formulation showed controlled release of cyclosporine over 5 days, on the other hand, the
marketed formulation showed a sharp Cmax with a 3-day release profile. The nanoparticulate formulation exerted significantly lower
nephrotoxicity in the rats as compared to Sandimmune Neoral®, which was evidenced by lower blood urea nitrogen (BUN), plasma creatinine
(PC) and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels in plasma and kidney. The results were further supported by the histopathological changes in kidneys.
Together, these results indicate that PLGA NPs have greater potential for oral delivery of cyclosporine.
© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Bioavailability; Cyclosporine; Nanoparticles; Nephrotoxicity; Oral delivery; Pharmacokinetics
1. Introduction
Cyclosporine is a potent immunosuppressive agent, which
has been widely used for the prevention of graft rejection
following organ transplantation such as kidney, liver, heart, lung
and pancreas as well as in the treatment of various autoimmune
disorders [1]. However, the oral bioavailability of cyclosporine
is low and highly variable owing to its troublesome biophar-
maceutical properties including poor aqueous solubility and low
intestinal permeability due to high molecular weight and rigid
cyclic structure. Additionally, P-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux from
the enterocytes and extensive pre-systemic metabolism in the
gut wall and liver further reduces its oral bioavailability [2,3].
Apart from the low and variable oral bioavailability,
cyclosporine is a critical dose drug with a narrow therapeutic
window [4] and the commercial formulation exhibits dose
dependent nephrotoxicity. Cyclosporine can induce different
forms of kidney dysfunction, from acute renal failure to chronic
renal diseases depending upon the dose and the duration of
treatment [1,5]. The severity of symptoms those were observed
outside the therapeutic window of cyclosporine necessitate the
development of less toxic cyclosporine formulation that can
control the blood levels of cyclosporine in the therapeutic range.
In order to overcome the above-mentioned difficulties,
various formulation approaches have been investigated includ-
ing the incorporation of drug into the particulate carriers. The
Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206
www.elsevier.com/locate/jconrel
☆Indian patent pending (1690/Del/2006).
⁎ Corresponding author. Department of Pharmaceutics, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), SAS Nagar-160062, Punjab,
India. Tel.: +91 172 2214683 89 (2055); fax: +91 172 2214692.
E-mail addresses: mnvrkumar@niper.ac.in, mnvrkumar@yahoo.com
(M.N.V.R. Kumar).
0168-3659/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2007.02.004

nanoparticulate formulations have been known to be an efficient
approach to achieve better pharmacokinetic profiles and even to
increase the oral bioavailability of poorly bioavailabile drugs
due to their specialized uptake mechanisms [6,7]. This system
circumvents the P-gp efflux and protects incorporated drug
molecules from the gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) degradation as
well as gut wall metabolism. The NPs also bypass the liver and
prevent the first pass metabolism of the incorporated drug.
Since the immunosuppressive activity of cyclosporine is related
to its selective action against T lymphocytes, which mainly
circulate in the lymphatic system, targeting the lymphatic
system through NPs may improve the therapeutic potential of
cyclosporine [8]. In addition, the NPs remain in the blood
circulation for a longer time and release drug in the plasma in a
sustained and continuous manner leading to lower fluctuations
in the blood levels that could minimize adverse effects caused
by the drug.
Biodegradable NPs, particularly of PLGA have been
increasingly used in drug delivery because of its biocompat-
ibility and biodegradability; however, their use in oral
administration has been limited. The degradation products
formed from the PLGA, which includes lactic acid and glycolic
acid, are the normal components of Kreb's cycle and are
subsequently eliminated as carbon dioxide and water without
affecting the normal cellular functions. Apart from the polymer,
the preparation of nanoparticles requires use of stabilizers,
which are the surface-active agents by virtue of their nature. It is
now well known that surfactants can alter the integrity of the
biological membranes [9]. Thus, if they are used in higher
concentration, they may induce toxicity. Additionally, the
stabilizer like PVA forms interconnected network with the
polymer at the nanoparticle interface, which cannot be removed
even with repeated washings. The nanoparticles with the higher
amount of residual PVA on the nanoparticle surfaces resulted in
its lower cellular uptake [10]. Therefore, it is desirable to have a
lower stabilizer concentration in the formulation. Recently, our
group used DMAB as stabilizer for making positively charged
estradiol nanoparticles of about 150 nm size. These particles
showed improved oral bioavailability of estradiol in comparison
to estradiol suspension. A series of studies in our laboratory
suggest DMAB as suitable stabilizer for PLGA NPs intended
for oral administration [7,11], considering the smaller sized
particles and the positive zeta potential. In light of the above, the
present study was intended to develop cyclosporine-loaded
PLGA NPs for improving its oral bioavailability and reducing
nephrotoxicity.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
PLGA (Resomer RG 50:50 H; inherent viscosity 0.41 dl/g)
and cyclosporine were gift samples from Boehringer Ingelheim
(Ingelheim, Germany) and Panacea Biotech (Mumbai, India),
respectively. Sandimmune Neoral® (Novartis) was purchased
from a local pharmacy store. Naproxen and Cremophor EL®
were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Didode-
cyldimethylammonium bromide (DMAB) was purchased from
Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Ethyl acetate and acetonitrile
(HPLC grade) were purchased from Rankem Fine Chemicals
(New Delhi, India). Thiobarbituric acid (GR grade), sodium
lauryl sulphate (LR grade), sodium hydroxide (LR grade) and
acetic acid (LR grade) were purchased from Loba chemie, India.
Ultrapure water (SG Water Purification System, Barsbuttel,
Germany) was used for all the experiments.
2.2. Method of preparation of NPs
NPs were prepared by emulsion–diffusion–evaporation
technique [7] with slight modifications. In brief, 10 mg of
cyclosporine and 50 mg of PLGA were dissolved in 2 ml of
ethyl acetate at 1000 rpm for 1 h. The organic phase was added
dropwise, with constant stirring to 3 ml of 0.1% DMAB
solution. The resulting primary emulsion was sonicated for
1 min with the help of a probe sonicator (UP200S Ultrasonic
processor, Germany). To this emulsion, 30 ml of water was
added with constant stirring at 1000 rpm resulting in
nanoprecipitation. The resultant preparation was kept overnight
on moderate stirring to evaporate the organic solvent.
2.3. Particle size and zeta potential of NPs
The particle size was measured by dynamic light scattering
(Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK) and zeta
potential was estimated on the basis of electrophoretic mobility
under an electric field.
2.4. Entrapment efficiency
Entrapment efficiency was determined by centrifuging the
drug-loaded NPs at 30,000 rcf for 30 min and separating the
supernatant. The pellet was dissolved in acetonitrile and
analyzed by reversed-phase (RP) HPLC system consisting of
717 plus auto sampler, pump controller and a Waters 996 PDA
detector which are configured to Millennium32 software version
3.05.01. All separations were achieved on the Symmetry C18,
4.6×250 mm, 5 μm analytical column (Waters, USA)
maintained at 70 °C. Acetonitrile:methanol:0.05 M phosphoric
acid (45:40:15) was used as mobile phase at flow rate of 1 ml/
min. The detection wavelength was 210 nm.
2.5. Effect of solvent on the particle size and entrapment
efficiency
The NPs were prepared using various solvents and their
combinations and the effect of solvent on the particle size,
polydispersity index (PDI) and entrapment efficiency was
studied.
2.6. Solubility study of cyclosporine in DMAB solutions
To evaluate the role of stabilizer in solubilization of the drug
in aqueous phase, solubility of cyclosporine at various con-
centrations of DMAB was measured by shake flask method.
198
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

Briefly, aqueous solutions containing different concentration of
DMAB (0.05%, 0.1%, 0.25%, 0.5% and 1% w/v of aqueous
phase) were taken into the vials to which 5 mg of cyclosporine
was added. The vials were kept in the shaker bath maintained at
37 °C and 75 rpm for 5 days. The samples were withdrawn at an
interval of 24 h until equilibrated solubility is reached. The
withdrawn samples were centrifuged at 30,000 rcf and super-
nant were collected, diluted appropriately with the mobile phase
and analyzed by validated RP-HPLC method.
2.7. Effect of stabilizer concentration on particle properties
The NPs were made with five different concentrations of
DMAB, viz. 0.05%, 0.1%, 0.25%, 0.5%, and 1% w/v of the
aqueous phase and its effect on the particle size and entrapment
efficiency was evaluated.
2.8. Initial drug loading studies
The effect of initial drug loading on the particle size and
entrapment efficiency was studied by preparing the particles
with initial drug loading from 5 to 20% w/w of polymer.
2.9. In vitro drug release study
The prepared NP formulation was evaluated for in vitro drug
release by dialysis membrane method. NPs containing 1 g of
entrapped cyclosporine were redispersed in 1 ml of phosphate
buffer containing 0.05% w/v of Tween 80 and placed in the
dialysis bags with a molecular mass cutoff of 12,000 Da. The
bags were suspended in 10 ml of 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH
7.4) and placed in shaker bath at speed of 100 rpm at 37 °C. The
release medium was completely replaced with fresh medium at
6, 12 and 24 h on the first day followed by sampling at a 24 h
interval. The amount of cyclosporine released in the medium
was analyzed using validated HPLC method.
2.10. Hemocompatibility study of NPs
Fresh heparinized blood was obtained from the Sprague
Dawley (SD) rats. Blood was mixed at 1:1 (v/v) ratio with
water (positive control); with normal saline (NS) (negative
control); 5 μg/ml of Cremophor EL® in NS; 2 μg/ml of
Sandimmune Neoral® in NS; blank NPs equivalent to 10 μg/
ml of drug-loaded NPs in NS; 0.1% DMAB in NS and
cyclosporine NPs equivalent to 2 μg/ml, 10 μg/ml and
100 μg/ml of cyclosporine in NS. Samples were incubated at
37 °C for 12 h in a water bath. At predetermined time points
(30 min, 6 h and 12 h), the samples were withdrawn and
intact red blood cells (RBC) were separated from plasma by
centrifugation at 6000 rcf for 5 min. Supernatant was collected
and incubated for 30 min at room temperature to allow for
hemoglobin oxidation. Oxyhemoglobin absorbance was mea-
sured spectrophotometrically at 540 nm. The percentage of
RBC lysis was calculated based on the assumption that 100%
RBC lysis resulted from a 1:1 (v/v) mixing of blood with
distilled water.
2.11. In situ permeation studies
The in situ uptake studies were carried out by closed loop
method [7]. Male SD rats weighing between 200 and 240 g were
used for the study. The overnight fasted rats were anesthetized
by injecting Thiopental (50 mg/kg body weight). Midline
incision was made on the abdomen and the intestinal segment of
jejunum (length about 15 cm) was separated from the rest of the
intestine by tying the distal end with thread. The drug
suspension was made by dispersing the drug in sodium carboxy
methyl cellulose solution followed by homogenization to get
the drug concentration of 1 mg/ml. The above made
cyclosporine suspension, Sandimmune Neoral® and drug-
loaded nanoparticles each containing 1 mg drug were injected
into the proximal portion of the intestine with the help of a
syringe followed by ligation with the thread. The segment of
jejunum was excised after 2 h and the intestinal content was
washed with water. The intestinal contents were dissolved in
acetonitrile and centrifuged. The clear supernatant was
evaluated for drug content by validated RP-HPLC. The uptake
was calculated indirectly by analyzing the % of drug, which
remained unabsorbed in the intestinal lumen.
2.12. Bioavailability studies
For in vivo studies, male SD rats weighing 200–240 g were
used. Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine nanoparticulate
formulations were administered to the overnight fasted rats by
oral gavage tube at a dose of 15 mg/kg body weight of the
animal. The blood samples (0.5 ml) were collected from the
retro-orbital plexus under mild ether anesthesia at 2, 6, 12, 24
and then every 24 h for 7 days into heparinized microcentrifuge
tubes (containing 50 U heparin/ml of blood). After each
sampling, 1 ml of dextrose–normal saline was administered to
prevent changes in the central compartment volume and
electrolytes. Plasma was separated by centrifuging the blood
samples at 6000 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C. To 250 μl of plasma,
750 μl of acetonitrile was added to precipitate proteins and 50 μl
of 2 μg/ml of internal standard (Naproxen) was added. The
samples were vortexed and centrifuged at 20,000 rcf for 15 min.
The supernatants were separated and vacuum-dried in Maxi Dry
Plus (Heto Lab Equipment, Germany). The residues were
reconstituted in 120 μl of acetonitrile/water (50:50) and
vortexed for 10 min, after which they were washed twice with
1 ml of n-hexane followed by centrifugation at 20,000 rcf for
15 min. The clear supernatants were analyzed for drug content
by validated RP-HPLC.
2.13. Evaluation of the nephrotoxicity profile
Nephrotoxicity studies were performed on male SD rats
weighing 200–240 g. The animals were housed in a
temperature-controlled room (22±2 °C) on a 14/10 h light/
dark cycle. Standard pellet diet and water were available. The
animals were randomly divided into four groups. Group-I was
kept as control without any treatment; Group-II was treated with
Sandimmune Neoral® (15 mg/kg/day); Group-III received
199
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

blank NPs equivalent to that of drug-loaded NPs and Group-IV
was administered with drug-loaded NPs equivalent to 15 mg/
kg/day cyclosporine. All treatments were given perorally by
gastric gavage through a metallic tube. The animals were fasted
for 6 h before all the treatments. The treatment was continued
for 30 days. After 24 h of last dose, the animals were sacrificed
and blood samples were collected into heparinized micro
centrifuge tubes and analyzed for biochemical parameters.
2.14. Estimation of BUN and PC levels
BUN and PC were determined colorimetrically using
commercially available kits (Accurex Biomedical Pvt. Ltd,
Mumbai, India).
2.15. Estimation of pro-oxidant/anti-oxidant balance
The MDA, a measure of lipid peroxidation, was assayed in
the form of thiobarbituric acid reacting substances (TBARS)
[12]. The method works on the principle of formation of
TBARS upon the reaction of MDA with thiobarbituric acid,
which is a pink colored complex that has a peak absorbance at
532 nm. In brief, the reaction mixture consisted of 0.1 ml of
8.1% sodium lauryl sulphate, 0.75 ml of 20% acetic acid
solution adjusted to pH 3.5 with sodium hydroxide and 0.75 ml
of 0.8% aqueous solution of thiobarbituric acid was added to
0.1 ml of plasma sample or tissue homogenate. The volume of
the mixture was made up to 2 ml with distilled water and heated
at 95 °C for 60 min. After cooling with tap water, the mixture
was centrifuged and the supernatant was analyzed at 532 nm
spectrophotometrically. The amount of TBARS formed was
calculated against the calibration curve prepared using MDA as
standard. The renal MDA contents were expressed as nano-
moles of malondialdehyde per milligram of protein.
2.16. Plasma levels of cyclosporine after last treatment
C2 (blood sample withdrawn 2 h post-dose) and trough
cyclosporine levels (C0; blood samples drawn before the next
oral dose) have been conventionally used to predict risk of
toxicity or organ rejection. So, the plasma blood samples were
withdrawn at 2 and 24 h after the last treatment. The plasma was
separated and cyclosporine levels were analyzed by the RP-
HPLC method as described previously.
2.17. Histopathological evaluation
The organs including kidneys, liver, spleen, jejunum, ileum
and colon were isolated immediately after sacrificing the
animal. The tissues were washed with ice-cold saline and fixed
in a 10% neutral buffered formalin solution. The tissues were
then embedded in paraffin blocks and used for histopathological
examination. Five-micrometer thick sections were cut, depar-
affinized, hydrated and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The
histological sections were examined under microscope (Leitz,
Wetzlar, Germany) for the morphological changes. The
morphometric analysis of the histological sections of kidneys
were carried out for all the treatment groups. The diameters of
the glomerular capillary tuft (CD) and the Bowman's capsule
(BD) were measured with the help of an internal micrometer
and the ratio CD/BD was calculated as an index of glomerular
collapse [13].
3. Results and discussion
PLGA NPs containing cyclosporine were prepared using
DMAB as stabilizer. Use of DMAB led to smaller sized
particles with narrow size distribution. The dispersion of the
organic phase due to stirring resulted in irregular-sized globules
in equilibrium with continuous phase. Sonication led to
reduction in size of globules and addition of water destabilizes
the equilibrium to force the organic solvent to diffuse to the
continuous phase. This process led to nanoprecipitation
resulting in the formation of NPs. Overnight stirring at room
temperature ensured complete evaporation of organic phase.
The above-mentioned process parameters led to smaller
particles with narrow distribution; however, entrapment effi-
ciency was very low. Literature reports and the findings in our
laboratory suggest that the choice of the solvent, stabilizer
concentration, initial drug loading, method of preparation along
with the physicochemical properties of drug can significantly
alter the entrapment efficiency. Therefore, the process optimiza-
tion of the cyclosporine-loaded NPs was taken up.
The influence of organic solvents on particle size and
entrapment efficiency was studied using various solvents and
their combinations as outlined in Table 1. The stabilizer
concentration used was 1% w/v of aqueous phase. Ethyl acetate
was found to be the ideal solvent for making the PLGA NPs
with narrow size distribution; however, the entrapment was very
low. The particles were also made with dichloromethane
(DCM), chloroform and DCM:ethyl acetate (80:20) with not
much success in entrapment, on the other hand these solvents
also lead to larger particles with wide size distribution as shown
in Table 1. The physicochemical properties of solvent like
viscosity, vapor pressure and surface tension could play a
crucial role in the overall particle properties. None of the
solvents and their combinations tested could influence the
entrapment efficiency suggesting the least possible role of
organic solvent on cyclosporine entrapment under the studied
conditions.
Table 1
Effect of organic solvent on size, PDI and entrapment efficiency with 1% w/v of
DMAB
Solvent
Z-average size
(nm)
PDI
% entrapment
efficiency
Ethyl acetate
63.5±3.8
0.10±0.03 16.6±2.1
Dichloromethane
502±43.3
1.00±0.20 19.6±1.3
Chloroform
201±25.4
0.66±0.12 23.1±1.1
Ethyl acetate:
dichloromethane (20:80)
266±35.6
0.28±0.03 23.1±3.6
All values reported are mean±S.D. (n=3).
The particle size and % entrapment efficiency are at initial drug loading of
10% w/w of polymer.
200
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

The stabilizer is another important factor, which can affect
the entrapment efficiency of lipophilic drug as they have a
tendency to form molecular aggregates known as micelles. The
micellar arrangement is such that the hydrophobic portions of
the stabilizer molecules form the hydrophobic core and the polar
head groups remain in the periphery of the micelles. The
micelles have a tendency to solubilize the lipophilic drug
molecules inside the hydrophobic core resulting in an increased
solubility of the lipophilic drugs. Solubility of cyclosporine was
increased with an increased concentration of DMAB as shown
in Table 2. The highest solubility of cyclosporine (644.2±
26.8 μg/ml) was found in 1% w/v DMAB solution.
Considering the concentration-dependent solubility of
cyclosporine in DMAB solutions, drug-loaded NPs were
prepared at varied DMAB concentrations (0.05%, 0.1%,
0.25%, 0.5% and 1% w/v). As DMAB concentration was
decreased from 1% to 0.05%, increase in the particle size was
observed, with the proportional increase in the entrapment
efficiency (Table 2). The lowest particle size was obtained with
the highest concentration of DMAB (1% w/v of aqueous phase),
while the highest entrapment efficiency was obtained with the
lowest DMAB concentration (0.05% w/v of aqueous phase).
The concentration-dependent solubility of cyclosporine in the
DMAB solutions was thought to be due to the formation of
micellar structures resulting in poor entrapment at 1% DMAB.
Considering the size and entrapment efficiency, 0.1% DMAB
concentration was found to be optimal which resulted in the
formation of monodispersed particles with the size of 143.3±
8.7 nm, zeta potential of 75.7±3.1 mV (at pH 4.4) and
entrapment efficiency of 71.9±1.7% at initial drug loading of
20% w/w of polymer. The initial drug loading was also found to
influence the particle size and entrapment efficiency. With
increase in the initial drug loading from 5 to 20% w/w of
polymer, the entrapment efficiency was increased (from 43.0±
3.7% to 71.9±1.7%).
Several mechanisms are responsible for the drug release
from the NPs including surface and bulk erosion, diffusion and
desorption [14]. The initial drug release from the PLGA matrix
has been found to occur by the diffusion of drug from polymer
matrix, whereas during the later phases the release is mediated
through both diffusion of drug as well as the degradation of the
polymer matrix itself. PLGA degradation occurs through a
process of autocatalytic hydrolysis of ester bonds. The acidic
monomers and the oligomers formed catalyze the further
degradation of the polymer. Thus, any factor that influences the
formation or retention of the acidic monomers in the particles
could affect the polymer degradation rate and the release of the
entrapped drug [15].
For conducting an in vitro drug release study for the
formulation containing lipophilic drug, maintenance of the
sink condition during the release study is the most important
aspect. Since cyclosporine is a highly lipophilic drug; the sink
condition has to be maintained during the release study, which
was achieved by the addition of 0.05% w/v of Tween 80 in the
phosphate buffer. Most of the drug-loaded nano- and micro-
particulate formulations show a biphasic release pattern wherein
there is an initial burst release followed by a sustained release of
the drug. However, low molecular weight PLGA NPs have also
been reported to exhibit zero order release profile, particularly
with lipophilic drug molecules [7]. Similarly, the cyclosporine
NPs also exhibited zero order release profile and showed
sustained drug release for 23 days at a nearly constant rate
(37 μg/day). The cumulative release was fitted into different
release models: zero order, first order, Higuchi's square root plot
and Hixson Crowell cube root plot. Zero order release pattern
was best fitted with release profile of NPs with r2 of 0.9905.
As NPs are expected to remain in the blood circulation for
longer time, their hemocompatibility was evaluated in vitro
with the rat blood. Incubation of blood with an equal volume of
water (as positive control) resulted in instantaneous RBC lysis.
Incubation with 5 μg/ml of Cremophor EL® (which is one of the
main components of the commercial formulation) and 2 μg/ml
of Sandimmune Neoral® led to significant RBC lysis compared
to NS (negative control). The RBC lysis in the presence of
stabilizer was concentration- and time-dependent. The presence
of DMAB at concentration of 1 mg/ml (0.1% w/v), resulted in
15.4, 30.9 and 65.8% of RBC lysis after 30 min, 6 h and 12 h
incubation, respectively (Fig. 1). In contrast, blank as well as
drug-loaded NPs (up to 10 μg/ml) did not cause significant
hemoglobin release after 12 h incubation with blood, which was
comparable to the percentage of RBC lysed in the normal saline
group. However, cyclosporine NPs at concentration of 100 μg/
ml enhanced the hemolysis after 12 h (Fig. 1).
The PLGA NPs used in the present studies were made with
DMAB, which is a surface-active agent, and literature reports
suggest that surface-active agents can compromise the mem-
brane integrity [9]. Thus, it is necessary to determine the effect
of NPs on RBC lysis. Due to the presence of the DMAB
stabilizer on the particle surface, the NPs should increase the
hemolysis. However, it was hypothesized that because of NP
formation from oil-in-water (o/w) microemulsion droplets, the
hydrophobic portion of the stabilizer was immobilized within
the NP matrix and hydrophilic head was localized on the surface
of the NPs [16]. This unique arrangement implies that DMAB
no longer retained its surface-active properties and therefore,
should not have caused RBC lysis. Incubation of blood with
Cremophor EL® at a concentration present in the Sandimmune
Neoral® has significantly enhanced the hemolysis, as it has
been reported to possess inherent hemolytic activity. Sandim-
mune Neoral® group showed even more hemolysis as compared
Table 2
Effect of DMAB concentration on aqueous solubility of cyclosporine, particle
size and entrapment efficiency
DMAB concentration
(% w/v of aqueous phase)
Solubility of
cyclosporine
(μg/ml)
Z-average
size (nm)
% entrapment
efficiency
0.05%
156.7±25.2
181.2±4.5
79.3±4.3
0.10%
235±50.1
143.3±8.7
71.9±1.7
0.25%
301.8±23.5
106±2.2
57.0±2.6
0.50%
458±24.9
80.3±7.4
37.9±1.9
1.00%
644.2±26.8
62.5±3.0
19.0±2.1
All values reported are mean±S.D. (n=3).
The particle size and % entrapment efficiency are at initial drug loading of
20% w/w of polymer.
201
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

to the Cremophor EL® group. Cyclosporine also reported to
have hemolytic activity, thus synergistic effect of Cremophor
EL® and cyclosporine could result in the higher RBC lysis
(Fig. 1).
Since our interest is in exploring nanoparticles for the oral
delivery, in situ uptake studies were carried out to confirm the
uptake of nanoparticles from the intestine, which is a
prerequisite for orally administered colloidal delivery systems.
The % intestinal uptake of cyclosporine as sodium CMC
suspension, Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine-loaded
nanoparticles were compared. The cyclosporine nanoparticles
showed significant higher intestinal uptake of around 90% as
compared to Sandimmune Neoral®, which showed around 55%
uptake. The least uptake of only 10% was observed for the
cyclosporine suspension (Fig. 2).
It has been observed that enhancement of electrostatic
interaction between the mucosal surfaces and particulate
carriers has a significant effect on their uptake and overall
bioavailability [17]. The epithelial cells in various tissues
including gastro-intestinal tract carry negative charge on their
surface due to the presence of negatively charged residues of
proteins in the outer membrane of the cell. It has been
anticipated that positively charged colloidal systems could
interact strongly with negatively charged cells leading to better
permeability and overall bioavailability. By virtue of their
cationic nature, DMAB stabilized particles showed higher
uptake; however, the role of particle size on the intestinal uptake
cannot be ignored. Sandimmune Neoral® contains cyclosporine
in the form of microemulsion, which can be readily solubilized
and absorbed depending on its permeability from the intestinal
wall. However, in case of the suspension, cyclosporine was
present in powder form, which must be dissolved for
subsequent absorption, which is a rate-limiting step for
cyclosporine absorption due to its very low aqueous solubility.
As a result, cyclosporine uptake from the suspension formula-
tion was quite low (Fig. 2).
The incorporation of cyclosporine into PLGA NPs was
explored as a method to increase the oral bioavailability of this
drug. The mean cyclosporine concentration in the plasma after
oral administration of cyclosporine NPs and Sandimmune
Neoral® (as a reference) at 15 mg/kg single dose in rats are
illustrated in Fig. 3. The relevant pharmacokinetic parameters
including Cmax, Tmax and AUC0–inf are listed in Table 3.
Fig. 3. Comparative in vivo plasma concentration vs. time profiles of
cyclosporine (15 mg/kg body weight of animal as a single dose) administered
orally as Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine-loaded NPs (all values
reported are mean±S.D., n=3).
Table 3
Pharmacokinetic parameters of cyclosporine upon oral administration of
Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine nanoparticles
Formulation type
Cmax (ng/ml)
Tmax (h)
AUC0–inf (ng h/ml)
Sandimmune Neoral®
1448.3±182.4
2
33396.0±4512.9
Cyclosporine NPs
448.5±61.4
24
39806.7±3970.2
All values reported are mean±S.D. (n=3).
Fig. 1. In vitro RBC lysis following incubation of 1:1 ratio of blood with normal
saline (NS) (negative control); 5 μg/ml of Cremophor® EL in NS; 2 μg/ml of
Sandimmune Neoral® in NS; 0.1% DMAB in NS; blank nanoparticles equivalent to
drug loaded nanoparticles (10µg/ml) in NS; drug-loaded nanoparties equivalent to 2,
10 and 100 μg/ml of cyclosporine in NS (all values reported are mean±S.D., n=3).
Fig. 2. In situ uptake of equivalent dose (1 mg) of cyclosporine as sodium CMC
suspension, Sandimmune Neoral® and nanoparticles, ⁎⁎⁎P<0.001, a and b vs.
Sandimmune Neoral® (all values reported are mean±S.D., n=3).
202
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

A wide variability in the absorption phase was observed
between Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine NPs. Sandim-
mune Neoral® upon oral administration resulted in sharp Cmax
within 2 h; however, the plasma concentration of cyclosporine
decreased rapidly. Whereas, relatively slow increase and
sustained plasma concentration of cyclosporine for a longer
time were observed after administration of cyclosporine NPs,
with significantly delayed Cmax occurring at 24 h, suggesting an
obvious controlled release of cyclosporine from the NPs. The
commercial formulation is a premicroemulsion concentrate
containing cyclosporine. It rapidly releases cyclosporine upon
exposure to the GIT fluids following oral administration leading
to overshooting of the plasma levels of cyclosporine (Fig. 3).
Since cyclosporine is a critical dose drug with narrow therapeutic
window, the overshooting of plasma levels is undesirable, which
leads to nephrotoxicity. On the other hand, the overshooting of
plasma levels was absent in the cyclosporine NPs treated group
as it showed controlled in vivo release of cyclosporine.
There was a marked difference in the AUC0–inf between
Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine nanoparticulate formula-
tion. The AUC0–inf was higher in the NPs treated group with a
relative bioavailability of 119.2% as compared to Sandimmune
Neoral®, indicating improved bioavailability of cyclosporine as a
nanoparticulate formulation. The NPs are preferentially taken up
intact from the GIT by the M cells in the Peyer's patches of gut
associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) followed by their shuttling
into systematic circulation and drug release in the blood. The
uptake involves the process of mucoadhesion and transcellular or
paracellular transit through the intestinal membranes. These
processes along with the controlled release of cyclosporine from
the nanoparticulate carriers could be responsible for the lower
values of Cmax and delay in appearance of maximum concentra-
tion in NPs treated group.
Dai et al. [18] reported an overall increase in relative
bioavailability of cyclosporine by 32.5% with the nanoparticu-
late formulations of Eudragit® as compared to Sandimmune
Neoral®. However, these formulations were not efficient in
controlling the drug release and cyclosporine was detectable in
plasma only for 3 days. On the other hand, the PLGA
nanoparticulate formulation was very efficient in controlling
the release of cyclosporine and showed controlled release of
cyclosporine over a period of 5 days.
It is well known that nephrotoxicity is one of the major
drawbacks associated with the cyclosporine therapy. It has been
reported that by controlling the drug release and modifying
tissue distribution of drugs using colloidal carriers, important
adverse effects may be minimized or even abolished [19]. The
preparation of cyclosporine-loaded NPs have previously been
addressed by different authors in order to increase the
therapeutic efficacy of the drug; however, no reports on chronic
nephrotoxic potential of such formulation were available.
Therefore, considering the potential of PLGA NPs for
controlling drug release, the present experiments were con-
ducted to determine their in vivo nephrotoxic potential.
In spite of great therapeutic potential of cyclosporine as an
immunosuppressive agent, the adverse effects, most important
of which is the nephrotoxicity, limits its clinical use.
Cyclosporine-induced chronic nephrotoxicity is characterized
by increased BUN, PC and MDA levels in kidneys and plasma,
in addition to the reversible and irreversible morphological
changes in the kidneys. BUN is an important biochemical
marker, which is routinely evaluated as an indicator of clinical
renal function. Abnormal rise in the BUN levels indicates the
dysfunction or damage to the kidney. Similarly, PC is another
reliable marker of the clinical renal function. Creatinine, the end
product of muscle metabolism, is also filtered and excreted by
the kidneys. The elevated PC levels are also important
indicative of renal dysfunction. The results of the study
revealed that administration of Sandimmune Neoral® (15 mg/
kg/day, orally for 30 days) caused an abnormal renal function in
all rats, which was indicated by significantly (⁎⁎⁎P<0.001)
higher BUN and PC levels in that group as compared to control
rats (Table 4). However, significantly (⁎⁎⁎P<0.001) lower
BUN and PC levels in the cyclosporine NPs treated group as
compared to Sandimmune Neoral® revealed lower nephrotoxi-
city in that group. There were no significant changes in BUN
and PC levels in the blank NP treated rats indicating that
particles itself do not exert any nephrotoxic effects (Table 4).
Table 4
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), plasma creatinine (PC), kidney and plasma MDA levels in rats on 31st day of study
Treatment groups
BUN levels (mg/dl)
PC levels (mg/dl)
MDA levels (nm/mg of protein)
Kidney
Plasma
Control
14.5±1.1
0.60±0.03
72.9±1.4
11.7±2.1
Sandimmune Neoral®
26.8±1.7⁎⁎⁎,a
2.02±0.10⁎⁎⁎,a
201.4±8.9⁎⁎⁎,a
38.8±3.0⁎⁎⁎,a
Blank NPs
16.9±1.8
0.58±0.03
43.5±10.0
10.4±1.3
Cyclosporine NPs
20.0±1.0⁎⁎⁎,b
1.19±0.07⁎⁎⁎,b
87.4±18.3⁎⁎⁎,b
26.2±7.6⁎⁎⁎,b
All values are mean±S.D. (n=3).
⁎⁎⁎P<0.001, avs. control, bvs. Sandimmune Neoral®.
Fig. 4. Plasma levels of cyclosporine at 2 and 24 h after last treatment of
Sandimmune Neoral® and cyclosporine NPs (all values reported are mean±S.D.,
n=3).
203
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

Many reports have confirmed that oxidative stress is one of
the major mechanisms involved in the cyclosporine nephro-
toxicity. A close relationship between oxidative stress and CyA-
induced nephrotoxicity has been confirmed in many experi-
mental models [20,21]. Cyclosporine has been reported to
enhance the MDA, an end product of the lipid peroxdation
which serves as an index of the intensity of the oxidative stress,
in the mesangial cells [22]. Chronic cyclosporine treatment
caused significant (⁎⁎⁎P<0.001) increase in MDA levels in
plasma as well as kidneys compared to control and blank NPs
treated rats. However, significantly (⁎⁎⁎P<0.001) lower levels
of MDA have been observed in the cyclosporine NPs treatment
group as compared to the Sandimmune Neoral® treated group,
again indicating lower toxicity in that group (Table 4).
As shown in Fig. 4, the nanoparticulate formulation showed
lower fluctuations in plasma levels of cyclosporine as compared
to commercial formulation, which could account for lower
Fig. 5. Hematoxylin and Eosin stained sections of rat kidneys: (A) renal cortex of
control (untreated) rat showing normal glomerular apparatus (GL), proximal tubule
(PT) and distal tubule (DT); (B) Sandimmune Neoral® treated group showing
distinct morphological changes including severe glomerular collapse and wide
spread tubular atrophy; (C) blank NPs treated group showing no morphological
alterations and (D) renal cortex of rats treated with cyclosporine NPs showing
lower glomerular collapse and mild tubular atrophy (magnification ×200).
Fig. 6. Light microscopic sections showing liver morphology of (A) control rat
showing (i) Kupffer's cells, (ii) binucleate hepatocytes, (iii) sinusoids and (v) central
vein; (B) Sandimmune Neoral® treated rat showing evident morphology alterations
including discrganization of hepatic parenchyma with widespread cell swelling and
congestion of sinusoids; (C) blank nanoparticles treated rat and (D) cyclosporine
nanoparticles treated rat showing no signs of alterations and the morphological
pattern is similar to control group (hematoxyline and eosin staining, ×630).
Fig. 7. Microscopic images of sections of jejunum of (A) control; (B)
Sandimmune Neoral® treated; (C) blank nanoparticles treated and (D)
cyclosporine nanoparticles treated rats showing the absence of inflammatory
cells in intestinal muscle layer in control and treated animals. For assessing
induction of inflammatory response, these histological structures were observed
closely as the most likely loci of visible physical changes. The arrows highlight
the absence of any inflammatory cells and damage therein after 1 month
treatment (hematoxyline and eosin staining, ×500).
Table 5
Morphometric analysis of histological sections of rat kidneys
Treatment groups
Morphometric analysis
(CD/BD)
Control
0.893±0.049
Sandimmune Neoral®
0.764±0.004⁎⁎⁎,a
Blank NPs
0.885±0.040
Cyclosporine NPs
0.823±0.071⁎⁎⁎,b
All values are mean±S.D.
⁎⁎⁎P<0.001, avs. control, ⁎⁎P<0.01, bvs. Sandimmune Neoral®.
204
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

nephrotoxicity of the nanoparticulate formulation. However, the
role of modified tissue distribution of the drug due to the carrier
system can not be ignored. Additionally, cyclosporine undergoes
significant first pass metabolism following oral administration
leading to the formation of large amount of potentially toxic
metabolites, which could also account for the nephrotoxicity of
the Sandimmune Neoral®. Since nanoparticulate carriers bypass
the first pass metabolism, it leads to a lower rate of the metabolite
formation, which could be the other possible reason for lower
nephrotoxicity of cyclosporine NPs.
The cyclosporine-induced nephrotoxicity is generally rever-
sible; however, it may lead to irreversible morphological changes
including glomerular collapse, tubular atrophy and interstitial
fibrosis upon chronic treatment. [13,23]. These morphological
changes lead to progressive loss of renal functions. The kidney
section from the control animal (without treatment) showed
normal proximal and distal tubules, glomerular apparatus and
Henle's loops (Fig. 5A). The glomerula of Sandimmune Neoral®
treated rats showed significantly (⁎⁎⁎P<0.001) higher glomer-
ular collapse and widespread tubular atrophy (Fig. 5B and
Table 5). The blank NPs treated rat kidneys showed no sign of
structural changes indicating that NPs themselves do not exert the
toxic effects (Fig. 5C). Interestingly, cyclosporine nanoparticu-
late formulation treated rats showed significantly (⁎⁎P<0.01)
lower glomerular collapse and only mild tubular atrophy as
compared to Sandimmune Neoral® treated rats (Fig. 5D and
Table 5). No sign of isometric vacuolation was observed in any of
the rat kidneys.
Histopathological examination of the primary metabolizing
organ (liver), spleen and the three intestinal segments viz.
jejunum, ileum and colon were also carried out to study the
presence of any inflammation after the administration of NPs.
The control rats showed normal cytoarchitecture of hepatic
parenchyma including Kupffer cells, hepatocytes and sinusoids
(Fig. 6A). On the contrary, Sandimmune Neoral® treatment
caused morphological alterations including disorganization of
hepatic parenchyma with widespread cell swelling and conges-
tion of sinusoids (Fig. 6B). However, no sign of morphological
Fig. 8. Microscopic images of sections of tissues of control, Sandimmune Neoral® treated, blank and cyclosporine nanoparticles treated animals showing no
inflammatory signs after 1 month treatment (hematoxyline and eosin staining).
205
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206

alterations was observed in the blank as well as cyclosporine
NPs treated rat livers (Fig. 6C and D).
The spleen histology of animals treated with Sandimmune
Neoral® and blank as well as cyclosporine NPs was not
different from normal, untreated ones in terms of the lymphoid
tissue mass, the sinusoids and the appearance of RBCs. The
inflammatory cells (lymphocytes) are inherently present in the
normal intestinal segments of jejunum, ileum and colon since
GIT is constantly challenged by the ingested xenobiotics, food
and microorganisms. Inflammatory response in the intestine is
normally evidenced by the appearance of inflammatory cells
in the muscle layer encircling the mucosa. In the present
experiment none of the intestinal segments showed any
inflammatory cells in the muscle layer (Fig. 7A–D). The
mucosa showed no evidence of degeneration, suggesting
that the NPs did not induce damage or initiate any inflammatory
response in these tissues. A comparison of healthy tissue
from untreated animals with that of animals treated with the
Sandimmune Neoral® and blank as well as cyclosporine NPs
showed no sign of inflammation after 1 month treatment
(Fig. 8).
4. Conclusions
The current study revealed the fact that cyclosporine-loaded
PLGA NPs can be prepared with high entrapment efficiency
using low stabilizer concentration. These particles were
efficient in controlling the drug release in vitro and in vivo.
The in vitro hemocompatibility studies revealed no significant
hemolysis exerted by the NPs upon the incubation with the
blood, indicating very good hemocompatibility. The nanoparti-
culate formulation showed significantly improved intestinal
uptake and oral bioavailability as compared to Sandimmune
Neoral®. Most importantly, the nanoparticulate formulation
exhibited lower nephrotoxicity upon the chronic administration
in rats as compared to the commercial formulation. Together
these results indicate that PLGA NPs could be a potential
alternative to the existing cyclosporine treatment.
Acknowledgements
Authors are thankful to Viswanand for his help with the
bioavailability study. The work was supported in partial by
research grants to MNVRK from Department of Biotechnol-
ogy (DT/PR5097/BRB/10391/2004) and Department of
Science and Technology (No. SR/FTP/CS-32/2004), Govern-
ment of India. Start-up funds to MNVRK, MS fellowship to
JLI, DKB and PhD fellowship to VB from NIPER are
gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are due to Rahul Mahajan
and Dinesh Singh for providing technical assistance to the
project.
References
[1] J.L. Italia, V. Bhardwaj, M.N.V.R. Kumar, Disease, destination, dose and
delivery aspects of ciclosporin: the state of the art, Drug Discov. Today 11
(2006) 846–854.
[2] J.C. Kolars, W.M. Awni, R.M. Merion, P.B. Watkins, First-pass
metabolism of cyclosporin by the gut, Lancet 338 (1991) 1488–1490.
[3] M.F. Hebert, Contributions of hepatic and intestinal matabolism and P-
glycoprotein to cyclosporin ans tacrolimus oral drug delivery, Adv. Drug.
Deliv. Rev. 27 (1997) 201–214.
[4] B.D. Kahan, Recommendations concerning the introduction of generic
formulations of cyclosporine, Transplant. Proc. 31 (1999) 1634.
[5] D. Faulds, K.L. Goa, P. Benfield, Cyclosporin. A review of its
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and therapeutic use
in immunoregulatory disorders, Drugs 45 (1993) 953–1040.
[6] V. Bhardwaj, S. Hariharan, I. Bala, A. Lamprecht, N. Kumar, R.
Panchagnula, M.N.V.R. Kumar, Pharmaceutical aspects of polymeric
nanoparticles fro oral delivery, J. Biomed. Nanotech. 1 (2005) 235–258.
[7] S. Hariharan, V. Bhardwaj, I. Bala, J. Sitterberg, U. Bakowsky, M.N.V.R.
Kumar, Design of estradiol loaded PLGA nanoparticulate formulations: a
potential oral delivery system for hormone therapy, Pharm. Res. 23 (2006)
184–195.
[8] R. Gref, P. Quell, A. Sanchez, P. Calvo, E. Dellacherie, Development and
characterization of CyA-loaded poly(lactic acid)–poly(ethylene glycol)
PEG micro- and nanoparticles. Comparison with conventional PLA
particulate carriers, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 51 (2001) 111–118.
[9] S. Shalel, S. Streichman, A. Marmur, The mechanism of hemolysis caused
by stabilizers: effect of solution composition, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 256
(2002) 66–76.
[10] S.K. Sahoo, J. Panyam, S. Prabha, V. Labhasetwar, Residual polyvinyl
alcohol associated with poly (D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles
affects their physical properties and cellular uptake, J. Control. Release
82 (2002) 105–114.
[11] I. Bala, V. Bhardwaj, S. Hariharan, S.V. Kharade, N. Roy, M.N.V.R.
Kumar, Sustained release nanoparticulate formulation containing anti-
oxidant ellagic acid as potential prophylaxis system for oral administra-
tion, J. Drug Target. 14 (2006) 27–34.
[12] H. Ohkawa, N. Ohishi, K. Yagi, Assay for lipid peroxides in animal tissues
by thiobarbituric acid reaction, Anal. Biochem. 95 (1979) 351–358.
[13] N. Origlia, M. Migliori, V. Panichi, C. Filippi, A. Bertelli, A. Carpi, L.
Giovannini, Protective effect of L-propionylcarnitine in chronic cyclos-
porine-a induced nephrotoxicity, Biomed. Pharmacother. 60 (2006) 77–81.
[14] D.A. Norris, N. Puri, P.J. Sinko, The effect of physical barriers and
properties on the oral absorption of particulates, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 34
(1998) 135–154.
[15] J. Panyam, M.M. Dali, S.K. Sahoo, W. Ma, S.S. Chakravarthi, G.L.
Amidon, R.J. Levy, V. Labhasetwar, Polymer degradation and in vitro
release of a model protein from poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) nano- and
microparticles, J. Control. Release 92 (2003) 173–187.
[16] J.M. Koziara, J.J. Oh, W.S. Akers, S.P. Ferraris, R.J. Mumper, Blood
compatibility of cetyl alcohol/polysorbate based nanoparticles, Pharm.
Res. 22 (2005) 1821–1828.
[17] M.H. El-Shabouri, Positively charged nanoparticles for improving the oral
bioavailability of cyclosporin-A, Int. J. Pharm. 249 (2002) 101–108.
[18] J. Dai, T. Nagai, X. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Meng, Q. Zhang, pH-sensitive
nanoparticles for improving the oral bioavailability of cyclosporine A, Int.
J. Pharm. 280 (2004) 229–240.
[19] C.E. Freise, T. Liu, K. Hong, R.W. Osorio, D. Papahadjopoulos, L. Ferrell,
N.L. Ascher, J.P. Roberts, The increased efficacy and decreased nephrotoxi-
city of a cyclosporine liposome, Transplantation 57 (1994) 928–932.
[20] F. Serimo, J. Grevel, K.L. Napoli, B.D. Kahan, H.W. Strobel, Generation
of oxygen free radicals during the metabolism of cyclosporine A: a cause–
effect relationship with metabolism inhibition, Mol. Cell. Biochem. 26
(1993) 101–122.
[21] R. Rezzani, Exploring cyclosporine A–side effects and the protective role–
played by antioxidants: the morphological and immunohistochemical
studies, Histol. Histopathol. 21 (2006) 301–316.
[22] K.V. Kumar, M.U. Naidu, A.A. Shifow, A. Prayag, K.S. ratnakar,
Melatonin: an antioxidant protects against cyclosporine-induced nephro-
toxicity, Transplantation 67 (1999) 1065–1068.
[23] V. Chander, N. Tirkey, K. Chopra, Resveratrol, a polyphenolic phytoalexin
protects against cyclosporine-induced nephrotoxicity through nitric oxide
dependent mechanism, Toxicology 210 (2005) 55–64.
206
J.L. Italia et al. / Journal of Controlled Release 119 (2007) 197–206