Venlafaxine-PLGA nanoparticles provide a fast onset of action in an animal
model of depression via nose-to-brain
M. Dolores Cayero-Otero a, Laura Perez-Caballero b
, Irene Suarez-Pereira c,d
,
María Hidalgo-Figueroa c,d,e
, Alejandra Delgado-Sequera d,e, Juan Manuel Montesinos g,
Esther Berrocoso c,d,e,1, Lucía Martín-Banderas a,f,1,*
a Department of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
b Department of Psychobiology, University of Granada, Campus de Cartuja, Granada, Spain
c Centro de Investigaci´on Biom´edica en Red en Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Madrid, Spain
d Neuropsychopharmacology & Psychobiology Research Group, Department of Psychology, University of Cadiz, C´adiz, Spain
e Biomedical Research and Innovation Institute of C´adiz (INiBICA) Research Unit, Puerta del Mar University Hospital, University of C´adiz, C´adiz, Spain
f Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS)-Campus Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain
g Hospital de Puerto Real, C´adiz, Spain
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Venlafaxine
Nose-to-brain
PLGA nanoparticles
Depression
A B S T R A C T
Background: Current treatment of depression is hindered by the delayed onset of the action of antidepressant
drugs, often resulting in treatment failure. Therefore, new therapeutic solutions are imperative.
Methodology: Venlafaxine-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles were produced by a double
emulsion-solvent evaporation method. Cellular safety assessment and internalization assays were carried out in
vitro in human olfactory neuroepithelium cells. The antidepressant effect of intranasal (nose-to-brain) nano­
particle administration was assessed in animals submitted to an animal model of depression by behavioral tests,
including open-field, sucrose preference test and tail suspension test.
Results: The drug entrapment efficiency (55–65 %), particle size (190–210 nm), polydispersity index (<0.2), and
zeta potential (−20 mV) of Venlafaxine-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles were determined to be
adequate. Nanoparticles did not show cytotoxic effects. Cell viability was more than 90 % for all formulations
and concentrations assayed. The results of the quantitative and qualitative cell uptake assays were consistent,
showing an evident internalization of the nanoparticles into the cells. Furthermore, venlafaxine-loaded nano­
particles administered for just 7 days were able to reverse the phenotype induced by a depressive-like model,
showing a significant antidepressant-like effect compared to those treated with free venlafaxine.
Conclusions: These findings indicated that intranasal venlafaxine-loaded poly(lactic-coglycolic acid) nano­
particles could become a viable technique for improving venlafaxine brain uptake via nose-to-brain. It could also
be a promising nanoplatform for enhancing the treatment of depression.
1. Introduction
One of the major hurdles in developing effective treatments for
central nervous system (CNS) disorders is the accessing the brain due to
the presence of the blood–brain barrier (BBB)(Dong, 2018). The BBB is
mainly composed of endothelial cells tightly sealed by tight junctions
which prevent the entry of harmful substances in the blood to the CNS
(Wang et al., 2019). The restrictive structure of this barrier results in a
therapeutic failure for many compounds because 100 % of large and
hydrophilic molecules and 98 % of small compounds are unable to cross
it (Pires and Santos, 2018).
Fortunately, a recent reliable route has been investigated. This route,
called nose-to-brain can bypass the BBB and the neurotherapeutics could
reach the brain directly. Although the route is not completely described,
it is known that the access of nanoparticles to the brain could be through
extracellular and intracellular pathways (Formica et al., 2022; Huang
* Corresponding author at: Department of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.
E-mail address: luciamartin@us.es (L. Martín-Banderas).
1 Joint senior authors.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Pharmaceutics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpharm
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2025.125692
Received 3 September 2024; Received in revised form 17 April 2025; Accepted 5 May 2025
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
Available online 6 May 2025
0378-5173/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

et al., 2024) using trigeminal and olfactory nerves (Crowe et al., 2018;
Giunchedi et al., 2020). After intranasal administration, actives are
transported to olfactory region by different pathways (Mittal et al.,
2014). This area is the only exposed section of the CNS to the external
environment, and it is responsible for drug delivery to different locations
of the brain (Shukla et al., 2021). Moreover, the route offers potential
properties compared to oral or intravenous administration. This non-
invasive and painless technique enhances patient compliance by
allowing drugs to pass directly to the brain. This bypasses hepatic first-
pass metabolism, resulting in a relatively fast onset of action (Erd˝o et al.,
2018; Szab´o-R´ev´esz et al., 2022).
The use of nanomedicine for intranasal administration is being
widely investigated due to the advantages of these administration sys­
tems can offer for the nose-to-brain route. Among the main advantages,
it can be mentioned: access to remote places; reduction of toxicity and
side effects; greater dose–response; enhanced solubility; improvement of
pharmacokinetics profiles compared with conventional medicines or the
control of drug release (Caban et al., 2014; Choi and Han, 2018; G¨anger
et al., 2018; Patra et al., 2018). Then, a great variety of drugs have been
encapsulated and tested for numerous brain pathological situations such
as glioblastoma (Ahmad et al., 2022; Bruinsmann et al., 2022; Ferreira
et al., 2021; De Fraga et al., 2021), brain injury (Li et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2021), epilepsy (Serralheiro et al., 2015; Shah et al., 2021;
Yousfan et al., 2021), schizophrenia (Pandey et al., 2022; Ruby and
Pandey, 2016), Parkinson’s disease (Dimiou et al., 2022; Trapani et al.,
2022), migraine (Jha and Mishra, 2022; Yadav et al., 2022), acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) (Kakad and Kshirsagar, 2021),
Alzheimeŕs disease (Sunena and Mishra, 2018), attention deficit hy­
peractivity disorder (ADHD) (Sharma et al., 2023), amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) (Lu et al., 2023) or depression (Liu et al., 2023; Sorren­
tino et al., 2020; Vitorino et al., 2020).
Moreover, recent studies have demonstrated that intranasal admin­
istration
of
nanoparticle-based
formulations
can
produce
antidepressant-like effects in animal models, suggesting potential effi­
cacy in humans. Nanoparticles can be engineered to deliver antide­
pressant agents directly to specific brain regions involved in mood
regulation, potentially enhancing therapeutic outcomes (Xinchen et al.,
2023).
Focusing on depression disease, Alberto et al., 2022 compiled 11
studies (three of them using venlafaxine-nanosystems) carried out using
lipid and polymeric nanosystems for the intranasal administration of
antidepressant substances, among them, a previous study from the au­
thors Cayero-Otero et al., 2019 which findings were protected by a
patent application (WO2020193838A1) (Martín-Banderas et al., 2020) .
The revision by Alberto et al. 2022 described the ideal characteristics
of nanoparticle formulation for intranasal administration and summa­
rized the main studies carried out with various active antidepressant
ingredients administered intranasally, including venlafaxine. More
recent, Upadhyay et al. 2024 collected the most relevant papers related
to the administration of antidepressant drugs administered via the nose-
to-brain. Authors analyzed the total number of 18 published articles. Six
of them described the use of venlafaxine encapsulated into different
nanosystems (Upadhyay et al., 2024). These recent reviews clearly
highlight the need for novel therapeutic strategies for treatment of
depression. Moreover, authors point out the interest in the nose-to-brain
route as an alternative for drug delivery to the central nervous system
and emphasize the ability of various nanosystems to reach the brain
after intranasal administration. In all the studies included in both re­
views, encapsulation of antidepressant actives led to improved delivery
of the drug to the brain, regardless of the study design. This translates
into a greater antidepressant effect and faster onset of action of encap­
sulated antidepressants, whether comparing different routes of admin­
istration or different formulations (free or encapsulated drug) after
intranasal administration.
As it is well known, the design of nanocarriers is a key point. Our
group carried out an in vivo biodistribution study in mice for different
types of nanoparticles (NPs): plain NPs, transferrin surface-modified
poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) NPs (Tf-PLGA NPs) and specific
peptide of transferrin receptor surface-modified PLGA NPs (TfRp-PLGA
NPs). Our study concluded that the simplest approach, plain NPs,
showed the highest ability to reach the brain after intranasal adminis­
tration (Cayero-Otero et al., 2019), avoiding receptor-mediated
endocytosis.
According to WHO, major depression will be the first global cause of
burden in 2030 and more than 300 million people worldwide are
affected (Malhi and Mann, 2018). Depression is a state of low mood
characterized by hopelessness and sadness, which can influence emo­
tions, feelings, acts or relationships leading, in many cases, to suicide
(Jani et al., 2019). Many types of antidepressants are currently avail­
able, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), monoamine oxidase in­
hibitors (MAOIs), or tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), however the lack
of a complete response in some patients remains a significant challenge
for global healthcare (Jaffe et al., 2019). The limited effectiveness of
antidepressant drugs, combined with their delayed onset of action,
contributes to unsatisfactory therapeutic results in patients with
depression, highlighting the importance of exploring new medications
or alternative approaches to address these challenges (National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence, 2022; Oliveira-Maia et al., 2023; Post­
ernak and Zimmerman, 2005). In our study, venlafaxine (VLF), a widely
used drug, has been used as a model drug. VLF is a SNRI has dual-
monoaminergic action can cause several side effects, including nausea,
insomnia, drowsiness, constipation, tachycardia, and dry mouth, among
others (Lipid et al., 2022). Furthermore, like other monoamine reuptake
inhibitors, it has a slow onset of therapeutic action following oral
administration, typically taking around 2–4 weeks for patients to
experience mood improvement (Entsuah et al., 1998). Although the
underlying pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic reason for this delay
are not well understood, it is clinically significant because it prolongs
patients associated disabilities and increases the likelihood of treatment
discontinuation (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence,
2022).
Moreover, oral bioavailability of VLF is low (40–45 %) and it shows a
short half-life (4–5 h), which results in frequent administration to
maintain therapeutic levels (Xu et al., 2020). Although there are com­
mercial controlled-release tablets and capsules, VLF is a hydrophilic
compound and presents a limited BBB permeability. For all this, VLF
becomes a suitable candidate to be encapsulated into NPs. Moreover,
VLF NPs administrated via nose-to-brain route could bolster intranasal
VLF delivery to the brain.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the brain-
targeting potential of VLF-loaded PLGA NPs via a non-invasive intra­
nasal nose-to-brain route. Thus, the study explores the use of nano­
particles for antidepressant drug delivery, with the goal of enhancing the
effectiveness, targeting, and safety of treatments such as venlafaxine. A
major challenge in antidepressant therapy is the difficulty many drugs
face in crossing the blood–brain barrier. By leveraging the nose-to-brain
route, nanoparticles can significantly improve drug delivery to the
brain, increasing bioavailability and reducing the time required to reach
therapeutic concentrations. As a result, the slow neuroadaptive
changes—such as receptor regulation and neuroplasticity—that typi­
cally take weeks with monoaminergic antidepressants could potentially
be accelerated. Additionally, nanoparticles offer controlled and sus­
tained drug release, minimizing dosing frequency and side effects. By
enhancing brain uptake, they may also lower the required dosage,
further reducing the risk of adverse effects associated with conventional
oral antidepressants. Thus, here we explored if VLF-loaded PLGA NPs
produced a fast and robust antidepressant-like responses after intranasal
administration in mice submitted to an animal model of depression.
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
2

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Resomer® RG 504H, PLGA terminated was obtained from Evonik
(Germany). VLF (Venlafaxine hydrochloride) and NHS (N-hydrox­
ysuccinimide) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (USA), ethyl acetate
(HPLC grade); dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (HPLC grade) and polyvinyl
alcohol (PVA) (MW = 72000 g/mol) were purchased from Panreac
(Spain).
For in vitro experiments, DMEM-F12 medium from Biowest (France)
was supplemented with inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) from Bio­
west (France), GlutaMAX from GibcoBRL (USA) and Primocin from
InvivoGen (USA). Penicillin-streptomycin, FITC (Fluorescein 5-isothio­
cyanate), trypsin-EDTA, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenylte­
trazolium bromide (MTT), PBS (pH = 7.4 ± 0.1), nile red (NR), and
paraformaldehyde (PFA) were provided by Sigma-Aldrich. Collagen I rat
tail was purchased from Gibco (Thermo Fisher, USA). Hoechst® 22,242
from Invitrogen (USA) and WGA (Wheat Germ Agglutinin) Alexa
Fluor™ 555 Conjugate was obtained from Thermo Scientific (USA).
2.2. VLF-PLGA NPs preparation
For the preparation of the NPs, a double emulsion-solvent evapora­
tion method (DE-SEV) was used with slight modifications (Martín-Ban­
deras et al., 2013). Briefly, 80 mg of PLGA were dissolved in ethyl
acetate (4 % w/v) and were emulsified by addition drop to drop of 100
uL of an aqueous solution of PVA (0.5 % w/v) containing 25 % w/w of
drug (VLF) under ultrasonication for 1 min at RT in an ultrasonic bath
(JP Selecta, Barcelona, Spain. 50 W). The resulting emulsion (W1/O)
was quickly dropped (with a pipette) into 10 mL of aqueous PVA solu­
tion at 0.5 % w/v (previously placed in the homogenizer on ice)
employing a high-speed homogenizer (Ultraturrax® T25 with S25N-8G
dispersing tool, IKA, Germany) for 1 min to obtain a double W1/O/W2
emulsion at 24.000 rpm. This emulsion was obtained using ice during
the emulsification process to prevent the overheating of the emulsion.
Afterwards, the emulsion was left under magnetic stirring employing a
magnetic stirrer (IKA RT-15, IKA Germany) until complete evaporation
of the organic solvent at room temperature (6 rpm). Then, NPs sus­
pension was collected (first centrifugation) and washed twice with 45 ml
of Milli-Q water by ultracentrifugation at 14.610 RCF for 30 min at 4 ◦C
(Eppendorf 5804R centrifuge, Eppendorf AG). Finally, NPs were resus­
pended in trehalose solution (5 % w/v) (final volume = 1 ml) used as
cryoprotectant and freeze-dried to obtain a fine and stable powder
(frozen and lyophilized at −
80 ◦C and 0.078 mbar; Telstar Cryodos,
Spain).
2.3. FITC-PLGA NPs production
For cell uptake studies, FITC was used as a fluorophore and cova­
lently bonded to PLGA to evaluate the internalization of NPs in cells. The
fluorescent polymer was synthetized through carbodiimide method
employing the protocol used in previous experiments (Cayero-Otero
et al., 2019). Then, fluorescent NPs were prepared by DE-SEV following
the same protocol followed to prepare VLF-PLGA NPs.
2.4. Nps characterization
NPs were characterized for mean hydrodynamic diameter, size dis­
tribution (PdI) and surface charge (ZP). The mean particle size and
polydispersity index of the blank of both VLF-loaded and FITC-PLGA
NPs was measured by photon correlation spectroscopy and the ZP was
analysed by Laser Doppler using a Zetasizer ZS90 (Malvern Instruments
Ltd, Malvern, UK). Measurements were carried out in triplicate after
diluting an aliquot of recently prepared NPs suspension with distilled
water at room temperature.
For the encapsulation capabilities studies, the drug content of the
NPs was evaluated by the previously validated HPLC method (Haque
et al., 2012) with slight modifications. Chromatographic separation was
achieved with a LiChroCART® 250–4 HPLC Cartridge LiChrospher®
100 5 μm column. First, aqueous supernatant was collected and filtered
(Millex GV syringe filter, 0.22 μm) and, then 20 μL of the supernatant
was injected into the HPLC system for drug detection and quantification
using a Hitachi LaChrom (D-7000) series HPLC equipped with a L-7200
automatic injector and a quaternary pump (model L-7100). Column was
kept at 25 ◦C (L2350 column oven, Elite LaChrom) and the measure­
ments were performed at 225 nm.
The amount of drug encapsulated in the development nanosystems
was calculated indirectly (Jain and Datta, 2014), measuring the amount
of active in the supernatant after NPs collection by ultracentrifugation
and compared with an initial amount of drug used to prepare the NPs.
The drug content into NPs was expressed as encapsulation efficiency (EE
%) and drug loading (DL%) according to the equations (1) and (2)
respectively:
EE% = ((total drug amount −
unencapsulated drug amount)/total
drug amount) x 100 (1).
DL% = ((total drug amount −
unencapsulated drug amount)/total
mass of NPs) x 100 (2).
2.5. In vitro cell studies
2.5.1. Cell culture
It is well known that the structure of the olfactory bulb comprises
different types of cells, including the cells used in this study derived from
the olfactory neuroepithelium (ONE) (Lavoie et al., 2017). ONE cells
were used for preliminary in vitro studies as they are one of the cell types
that the particles may initially encounter on their journey through the
intranasal route. ONE cells were obtained from a healthy volunteer by
nasal brushing as described previously (Delgado-Sequera et al., 2021).
This healthy subject provided written, informed consent, approved by
the Ethics Committee (PI-151019). Cells obtained by the nasal brushing
included highly proliferative neural precursors that were grown at 37 ◦C
with 5 % CO2, in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium/Ham F-12
(DMEM/F12) supplemented with 10 % FBS, 2 % GlutaMAX and 0.2 %
Primocin. When the confluence was reached, cells were detached with
0.25 % trypsin-EDTA and replated in DMEM/F12 medium supple­
mented with FBS (10 % v/v), antibiotic–antimycotic (1 % v/v) and
Glutamax® (2 % v/v) in humidified environment (AutoFlow NU-4750
Water Jacket CO2 incubator; NUAIRE, USA). The medium was
replaced every day, and the in vitro experiments were carried out in
passage 5.
2.5.2. In vitro cell cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxicity of the NPs was evaluated by the MTT proliferation
assay, determining mitochondrial dehydrogenase activity (Mosmann,
1983). The MTT (yellow) is cleaved to formazan (violet) by a system of
the mitochondrial respiratory chain of living cells. This change of colour
can be quantified by spectrophotometry.
Cells from the ONE were plated at a density of 4 x 104 cells/well in a
96-well plate (Nunclon®) and incubated for 24 h at 37 ◦C to allow cell
attachment. Then, the medium was completely removed, and cells were
washed twice with 200 µL of PBS before the incubation with different
concentrations of NPs (from 0.1 to 1000 µg/mL, approximately equiv­
alent to 0.0155–––155 µg/ml of VLF) for 24 h. NPs suspension was
removed after incubation time and cells were washed twice with PBS.
50 µL of MTT solution (1 mg/ml in medium) was added to each well for
2.5 h in dark. Finally, MTT solution was discarded and MTT formazan
crystals were dissolved with 100 µL of isopropanol, shaking in dark for
10 min at room temperature. Absorbance was measured in a microplate
reader (Synergy HT, BioTech, USA) at 570 nm and cell viability was
calculated following equation (Cayero-Otero et al., 2019):
Viability (%) = ((experimental value – negative control) / (positive
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
3

control – negative control)) x 100 (Eq. 3).
Cells incubated only with DMEM/F12 medium were used as negative
control and DMSO as positive control.
2.5.3. In vitro internalization studies
The uptake of NPs into the cells was determined by qualitative and
quantitative analysis and FITC-PLGA NPs were used for those purposes.
Analysis by confocal laser microscopy.
For qualitative studies of NPs internalization, ONE cells were seeded
(4 x 104 cells/well) in a µ-Slide 8 well (iBidi, Germany) and were
allowed to attach overnight. After that, cells were washed twice with
PBS (pH 7.4) and incubated with FITC-PLGA NPs suspension (250 µg/
mL in culture medium without FBS) for 1 and 2 h at 37 ◦C. At the end of
incubation time, cells were washed twice with PBS to remove the re­
mains of NPs suspension and the nuclei were counter-stained with
Hoechst® 33,342 for 10 min. Then, cells were washed twice with PBS
and the cytoplasms were stained with WGA-Alexa Fluor 555. Finally,
cells were washed twice with PBS and fixed with PFA (4 % w/v in PBS)
Fig. 1. (A) Experimental design of the in vivo experiments. Mice underwent a baseline sucrose training test four days prior to the start of the CORT regimen. Animals
were exposed to the tap water (control animals) or CORT via drinking water for 28 days in decreasing doses equivalent to a daily dose of 6.6 mg/kg/day for 15 days,
followed by 2.7 mg/kg for 3 days and 1.1 mg/kg for 10 days. Treatments (VLF-loaded NPs, Blank NPs, VLF free drug or PBS) were administered intranasally daily
during the last 7 days of the CORT regimen. Behavioural experiments including the open-field test (OF) the sucrose preference test (SPT) and the tail suspension test
(FST) were performed. (B) Effects of CORT administered orally via the drinking water upon fluid and food consumption. The intake was tracked three times a week
over the 28 days of the CORT regimen. Estimation of daily intake of fluid per mice determined by weighing bottles and estimation of food intake per mice measured
in grams of pellet consumed. All values are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical significances displayed are results of depression model factor obtained by a repeated
measure ANOVA analysis (n = 9–10 per group). (C) Effect of treatments on locomotor activity in the OF. Graph represents the mean of the total distance travelled
expressed in arbitrary units (A.U.) ± S.E.M. Two-way ANOVA test (n = 13–17 per group). (D) Effect of treatments on the SPT. Graph represents the mean of the
percentage of sucrose preference ± S.E.M. Two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test (n = 12–21 per group). (E) Effect of treatments on the tail sus­
pension test. Graph represents the mean of the immobility time expressed in seconds ± S.E.M. Two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test (n = 5–10 per
group). * p < 0.05 vs respective control group, ## p < 0.01 vs PBS-treated group, & p < 0.05 vs VLF-treated group, + p < 0.05 vs Blank NPs- treated group.
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
4

for 20 min and maintained in PBS to be observed by confocal laser
scanning microscope (Leica Stellaris 8 Falcon; Leica; Germany) with
imaging software (Las X). Cells without NPs were used as control.
Quantitative study by flow cytometry.
For this purpose, cells were plated in a 6-well plate (9.6 cm2/well) at
a density of 1 x 106 cells per well (2 ml) and were allowed to attach
overnight. The next day, medium was retired, and cells were washed
twice with PBS and incubated with FITC-PLGA NPs suspension (500 µg/
ml in culture medium without FBS) for 2 h. After incubation, the sus­
pension was removed, and the wells were washed twice with PBS to
eliminate the particle suspension residues. The cells were detached with
trypsin-EDTA (1 mL) for 5 min. Finally, the cell suspension was washed
and resuspended with PBS and placed directly in cytometer tubes. The
fluorescent NPs inside of cells were measured using a flow cytometer
(MACSQuant VYB; Miltenyi Biotec; Germany) and the data were
analyzed with MACS Quantify software). Cells non-incubated with
fluorescent particles were used as a control of basal autofluorescence.
2.6. In vivo studies
2.6.1. Animals
Adult male C57BL/6J mice (10 weeks old at the beginning of the
experiments) were housed under controlled conditions (22 ± 1 ◦C; 12-h
light/dark cycle) with food and water available ad libitum. All proced­
ures were performed in accordance with the European Guidelines
(2010/63/EU) and Spanish Law (RD 53/2013) regulating animal
research. All the experimental protocols were approved by the Ethical
Committee for Animal Experimentation of the University of C´adiz.
2.6.2. Experimental design
In brief, the depression-like model was established by oral cortico­
sterone (CORT) chronic administration. Animals were presented with
water (control group) or CORT (CORT group) diluted in the drinking
water for 28 days. In order to assess the baseline behaviour, a sucrose
preference test (SPT) was performed 3 days before the CORT regimen.
Drinking and food consumption was followed three times a week during
the 4-weeks of CORT administration in each cage. Additionally, mice
were administered daily from the 21st to the 28th day of the CORT
regimen with i.n. administration of VLF-loaded NPs, Blank NPs, VLF free
drug or PBS. After that, to examine the possible antidepressant-like ef­
fect of these treatments animals were tested in the open-field test (OF),
the sucrose preference test (SPT) and tail suspension test (TST) with an
interval of 2 days between tests (Fig. 1).
2.6.3. Mouse model of depression
The animal model of depression used is the one induced by chronic
CORT administration. This model induces a depressive-like phenotype
that effectively mimics both the behavioral symptomatology and the
neurobiological mechanisms typical of depression (Gourley and Taylor,
2009; Zhao et al., 2008). The mice model of depression was induced as
described previously (Ferr´es-Coy et al., 2016). CORT (Sigma-Aldrich,
Spain) was dissolved in regular tap water and brought to a pH of 7.4.
Mice were exposed to CORT for 28 days in decreasing doses equiv­
alent to a daily dose of 6.6 mg/kg/day for 15 days, followed by 2.7 mg/
kg for 3 days and 1.1 mg/kg for the last 10 days until the start of the
behavioural evaluation. CORT was prepared freshly every 72 h and kept
light protected in opaque bottles. Animals in the control group received
water only.
2.6.4. Treatment
Treatment was initiated on day 21 post-exposure to CORT and was
maintained for 7 consecutive days. All treatments were applied daily
intranasally in both nostrils, 5 µL drop in each nostril (total volume 10
µL/day). For i.n. administration, animals were lightly anaesthetized
with 2 % isoflurane (Farmavet, Spain) and placed in a supine position.
VLF-PGLA NPs at a dose of 0.06075 mg/day or an equivalent amount of
blank NPs were administered. Free VLF was diluted in PBS and admin­
istered daily at 0.06075 mg/day. Control mice received PBS.
2.6.5. Behavioural assessment
Open-field test (OF).
Locomotor activity was measured using an open-field apparatus to
assess the spontaneous movement and exploratory behavior of the mice.
The apparatus consisted of a square plexiglass box (45 × 45 cm) with 35
cm high walls. Mice were placed in one corner of the box and allowed to
roam freely for a period of 15 min. During this time, the movement of
the animals was recorded and tracked using a camera connected to the S.
M.A.R.T system (Spontaneous Motor Activity Recording and Tracking:
Panlab, S.L.), which measures the total distance travelled in arbitrary
units. This test allows for the quantification of locomotor activity,
providing valuable insights into the effects of the treatments on general
motor function and exploratory behavior.
Sucrose preference test (SPT).
The SPT is a reward-based test, used as an indicator of anhedonia, a
core symptom of depression. SPT was assessed in a two-bottle paradigm
for 8 h (9:00–17:00 h), where the mice received two bottles, one filled
with 1 % sucrose solution and one with tap water. After half of the time
(4 h), the places of the bottles were changed to avoid side bias. No
previous food or water deprivation was applied before the test. The
weight of each bottle was determined before and after the test to
accurately determine the volume of liquid consumed. The sucrose
preference was calculated in percentage as the amount of consumed
sucrose solution divided by the total liquid intake (Liu et al., 2018). This
measurement provides an index of the animal’s motivation for a sweet
reward, with a decrease in sucrose preference compared to water indi­
cating an anhedonic-like behavior, a hallmark of depressive states (Liu
et al., 2018). The SPT is performed both before (as baseline) and after
the CORT regimen to assess any changes in reward sensitivity and
behavior following the experimental treatment.
Tail suspension test (TST).
The TST is one of the most widely used preclinical tools to study anti-
depressant activity in mice (Steru et al., 1985). This test is based on the
behavioral response of mice to an inescapable situation, specifically
assessing the duration of immobility as a proxy for depressive-like
behavior. In the TST, mice were individually suspended by the tail 20
cm above the floor using adhesive tape placed 1 cm from the tip of the
tail. This position forces the animal to remain suspended in a helpless
state, leading to a natural tendency to either attempt to escape or remain
immobile. The test session lasted for 6 min, and they were videotaped
and subsequently scored by a trained observer. The total duration of
immobility during the test was measured. A reduction in immobility in
this test was considered to indicate antidepressant activity (Berrocoso
et al., 2013; Can et al., 2012).
2.7. Statistical analysis
For the in vitro experiments, data were expressed as the mean ± S.D.
of the parameter measured. For the in vivo experiments, data were
analysed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the
Bonferrroni post-hoc test. The factors evaluated (between subjects) were
the depression model and treatment. Data were analysed using Prism 7.0
GraphPad and Statistica 10.0 software. All p-values < 0.05 were
considered statistically significant.
3. Results
3.1. Nps production and physicochemical characterization
The production of blank and VLF-loaded NPs (VLF-PLGA NPs) was
carried out by DE-SEV method and the mean particle size, polydispersity
index (PdI) and zeta potential (ZP) were measured as previously were
described (subsection 2.4). The data are expressed as the mean value ±
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
5

SD.
The mean hydrodynamic diameter of blank PLGA and VLF-PLGA NPs
was 192.1 ± 6.7 nm and 208 ± 2.9 nm, respectively. The PdI was less
than 0.2 indicating a high homogeneity and narrow size distribution
(Stetefeld et al., 2016). The surface charge was measured after washing
NPs twice by ultracentrifugation to remove the PVA residues (Zambaux
et al., 1998). ZP were very similar for blank and loaded NPs, –21.4 ± 0.3
mV and –22.4 ± 1.3 mV, respectively.
Regarding FITC-PLGA NPs used for internalization studies, similar
results were obtained. The average size of these NPs was 277 ± 7 nm
with a PdI = 0.102 ± 0.065 and ZP values were –21.7 ± 0.2 mV.
The encapsulation process was measured indirectly, calculating the
amount of drug in the supernatant as described in the Method section
(subsection 2.4). The EE% and DL% of PLGA NPs were 55–65 % and
10–12 %, respectively.
3.2. In vitro cell studies
3.2.1. In vitro cell cytotoxicity assay
VLF was approved in 1993 by FDA (Watanabe et al., 2018) and is
known to have a favourable safety profile. However, toxicity cell studies
are extremely important in the development of NPs. Thus, an MTT assay
was carried out in order to evaluate the metabolic activity of viable ONE
cells
after
incubation
with
these
formulations
at
different
concentrations.
For this assay, we used ONE cells incubated with a range of con­
centrations (0.1–––1000 ug/mL) of blank and VLF-loaded PLGA NPs.
Cells incubated with medium (without PLGA NPs) were used as negative
and DMSO as positive control. After 24 h of incubation, the metabolic
activity of living cells was superior to 85 %, maintaining cell viability in
the range of 90––100 % for all the formulations (blank and VLF-loaded
NPs) and concentrations assayed. Results obtained are summarized in
Fig. 2. The obtained results shown less than 15 % viability loss after
incubation, suggesting that unloaded and VLF-loaded NPs are compat­
ible with these cells according to the ISO 10993–5 guidelines (Biological
evaluation of medical devices. Part 5: Test for in vitro cytotoxicity).
Additionally, the cytotoxicity of the cells was also evaluated after in­
cubation with the free drug and the viability was superior to 90 % for all
concentrations (Fig. 2).
3.2.2. In vitro internalization study
To evaluate the association of NPs to ONE cells, laser confocal mi­
croscopy was used. Briefly, FITC-PLGA NPs were incubated (250 µg/mL)
for 1 h or 2 h with ONE cells and their behaviour was visually evaluated.
Results (Fig. 3) showed that FITC-PLGA NPs can interact with ONE
cells (60 and 120 min) with a greater accumulation after 120 min,
Additionally, in order to check the localization of NPs, a Z-stack
(optical section: 2.5 µm) was performed to confirm that NPs are inside of
cells. Images obtained confirm NPs internalization and their location in
cytoplasm and nucleus (supplementary data).
To support the qualitative assays, a quantitative study was carried
out to confirm the internalization of fluorescent NPs (FITC-PLGA NPs) in
ONE cells by flow cytometry. For this purpose, cells and fluorescent
nanoparticles were incubated under same conditions of visual assay
(250 µg/mL, 60 and 120 min, 37 ◦C) and after incubation, samples were
analysed by flow cytometry.
As it shown in Fig. 4, compared with negative control (cells incu­
bated without NPs), the intensity of fluorescence increased around 33 %
(46.24 % vs 78.91 %) after 60 min and around 44 % after 120 min
(46.24 % vs 90.55 %) confirming the presence of fluorescent NPS inside
of the cells. These results suggest that NPs internalization is a time-
dependent process.
Beyond the useful information about the tolerable dose, the associ­
ation studies (NPs cell uptake) could provide an insight into the access
mechanism to the brain. In this sense, and due to the physicochemical
properties of the nanosystems assayed in this work (diameter > 100 nm
and slightly negative zeta potential), the main hypotheses supported by
the scientific community to understand the nose-to-brain access of
nanoformulations to the brain is the intra-cellular pathway (Chen et al.,
2024; Clementino et al., 2021).
4. In vivo studies
4.1. Fluid and food consumption
The fluid and food consumption were monitored over the CORT
regimen to check the induction of the depressive-like behavior. As ex­
pected, CORT administration produced a significant increase of both
fluid and food intake (Fig. 1B).
4.2. Locomotor activity
The OF was performed to evaluate the effect of CORT and the
administration of each i.n. treatment on the spontaneous locomotion of
the animals. The results showed that none of the treatments significantly
modified the animal’s motor activity in the OF (Fig. 1C).
4.3. Sucrose preference test
No differences between groups in sucrose preference before the
CORT regimen (at baseline measurement) were observed (data not
shown). However, CORT significantly decreases the sucrose preference
in both PBS and Blank NPs- treated animals demonstrating that the
depression model produced anhedonia. Regarding the effect of i.n.
treatments, none of the treatments induced any effect on the sucrose
preference in control animals. However, in animals submitted to CORT
while the VLF-free drug was not able to modify the sucrose preference,
the VLF-loaded NPs restored the deficit induced by the animal model,
showing a significant increase in sucrose preference compared to all
PBS-, VLF- and Blank NPs- treated animals. Thus, the dose employed of
VLF free drug was not able to normalize the sucrose preference, but the
same dose administered through the NPs was able to block the anhe­
donic effect induced by the depression model (Fig. 1D).
4.4. Tail suspension test
Regarding the tail suspension test, the results showed that the CORT
regimen induced a depressive-like behaviour due to increases in the
immobility time in PBS-treated animals. Regarding the effect of i.n.
treatments, none of them altered the immobility time in control animals,
however, in CORT animals VLF-loaded NPs significantly decreased the
immobility time and restored the depressive-like behavior induced by
the model. As in SPT, the dose employed of VLF free drug was not able to
restore the depressive-like behaviour.
Fig. 2. Viability of ONE cells after 24 h of incubation with different concen­
trations (0.1–––1000 ug/mL) of blank NPs, VLF-loaded NPs and free drug
(VLF). Graph represents the mean ± S.D (n = 6).
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
6

5. Discussion
5.1. Nps production and physicochemical characterization
VLF is a dual action antidepressant which presents a short half-life,
narrow absorption window and remarkable hepatic first-pass meta­
bolism, which leads to poor oral bioavailability (Li et al., 2021). In the
conventional oral therapy, these disadvantages lead to frequent
administration to maintain the therapeutic levels and restricted access to
the brain due to the presence of the BBB. Therefore, the encapsulation of
the antidepressant in polymeric NPs could improve the current oral
therapy compared to traditional dosage forms becoming a promising
formulation for depression treatment.
Taking into account the solubility of the polymer (hydrophobic) and
the active (water-soluble drug), NPs were prepared by double emulsion-
evaporation method (Ding et al., 2019; Iqbal et al., 2015) using PLGA, a
polymer that is approved for human use by FDA and EMA. The type of
nanoparticle to employ in the in vivo studies was based on the results
obtained in previous work, as mentioned above (Cayero-Otero et al.,
2019).
For VLF NPS, results obtained by Malvern Zetasizer showed a low PdI
(<0.4) indicated the homogeneity of the population and the
Fig. 3. Merged confocal microscopy images of ONE cells after 60 min (A) and 120 min (B) of incubation with FITC-PLGA NPs (250 µg/mL). Representative
immunofluorescence images in ONE cell for FITC-PLGA NPs in green (A1, B1), cytoplasm marked in red with WGA-Alexa Fluor ® (A2, B2), nuclei stained in blue with
Hoechst® (A3, B3) and merged (A and B) in ONE cells using 20x objective for A and 60x objective for B.
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
7

aerodynamic diameter not exceeding 200 nm. This particle size, ac­
cording to the literature, is the limit for an efficient brain targeting ef­
ficiency through olfactory region (Tong et al., 2017). Then, a low PdI is
essential to ensure a monodisperse population because size is a critical
factor for access to the CNS by the intranasal route, determining the
mechanism of entry into the brain (Bonaccorso et al., 2017).
FITC-PLGA NPs exhibited a slightly larger but compatible size
(around 270 nm) for their use in internalization studies with a highly
homogeneous population.
Regarding the zeta potential, negative values of all formulations
indicated a stable system without aggregation and easy redispersion and
the absence of PVA on the surface of nanosystems (Zambaux et al.,
1998). It is essential to remove the PVA residues to ensure a sufficient
negative charge and prevent aggregation. Zeta potential also influences
both nanoparticle stability in biological fluids and the risk of immune
clearance and longer circulation times in the bloodstream. This is mainly
due to their reduced interaction with plasma proteins and decreased
uptake by the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) (Blanco et al.,
2015). Authors previously demonstrated an accumulation of less than 5
% of nanoparticles in spleen or liver, in an in vivo biodistribution assays,
indicating minimal clearance.
Finally, EE% and DL% values obtained by DE-SEV method were
remarkably reproducible, with more than 50 % of initial amount
encapsulated into the NPs suggesting the particles production method
was optimal.
5.2. In vitro MTT and internalization studies
As mentioned above, although the mechanism of nose-to-brain route
is not completely elucidated (Yokel, 2022), most studies suggest that
there are several possible routes may be implicated (Borrajo et al., 2022)
in the nose-to-brain pathway and it is well-known that trigeminal and
olfactory nerves are involved (intracellular and extracellular pathway)
(Giunchedi et al., 2020)(Kumar et al., 2014). Therefore, the study of
cellular uptake of PLGA NPs can be a useful tool to determine the ability
of them to reach the brain across the olfactory cells in future in vivo
experiments.
In the in vitro experiments, cell uptake assays (qualitative and
quantitative) of fluorescent NPs (FITC-PLGA) and cytotoxicity test of
formulations were evaluated after the incubation with olfactory cells.
On the one hand, cell viability analysis indicated that incubation
with the NPs assayed did not result in significant cytotoxicity, as cell
viability remained above 85 %. According to the ISO 10993–5:2009
guidelines, these results suggest that the tested formulations are non-
toxic within the studied concentration range. On the other hand, in
order to establish a correlation between in vivo and in vitro assessments
and elucidate the access of the fluorescent NPs to the brain, we studied
the internalization of NPs in ONE cells for 60 and 120 min. Our results
showed that fluorescent NPs can interact with olfactory cells, suggesting
that NPs could cross the cells in nose-to-brain route in case of intracel­
lular pathway. The quantitative uptake studies of NPs, confirm the re­
sults obtained for qualitative analysis. These results are in concordance
with recent literature. It is believed that particles with sizes greater than
100 nm could access the brain through the intracellular route, which
would reinforce the need of efficient cellular internalization
(Clementino et al., 2021)(Chen et al., 2024).
5.3. Antidepressant-like effect
In the present study, we use a depressive model in rodents based on
the chronic administration of CORT. The exposure to exogenous CORT
produces a persistent depression-like state sensitive to antidepressant
treatment in rodents. This behavioral phenotype is accompanied by
brain changes inherent to depressive-like states, which overall makes
this model an appropriate tool to assess the antidepressant-like effect of
novel drugs (Gourley and Taylor, 2009)(Zhao et al., 2008). First, we
controlled the proper induction of this animal model by the evaluation
of the food and drinking consumption during the entire protocol. In
agreement with previous findings, the chronic administration of CORT
induces an increase in liquid and food consumption (David et al., 2009;
Ferr´es-Coy et al., 2015). Additionally, at the end of the protocol we
demonstrated the depressive-like state in CORT–treated animals as
measured by the decrease in the sucrose preference as well as with the
increase in the immobility time in the TST.
To evaluate the behavioral effect of the different intranasal treat­
ments, we evaluate the animals in the OF, the sucrose preference test
Fig. 4. Flow cytometry analysis of internalization evaluation of FITC-PLGA NPs after 60 min (green) and 120 min (blue) at 250 µg/mL of concentration. Negative
control is illustrated in red.
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
8

and the TST. Spontaneous locomotor activity assessed in the OF is a
sensitive measure in rodents of sedative and stimulant effects induced by
drugs. Our results showed that neither VLF-loaded NPs nor VLF-free
drug produced any effect on the spontaneous activity. Indeed, previ­
ous studies demonstrated that acute high doses of VLF produced an in­
crease in locomotor activity while chronic administration did not affect
or even induce a sedative effect measured in the OF (Redrobe et al.,
1998) (Karlsson et al., 2011), (Zhang et al., 2022). The low potential for
stimulant or sedative effects after VLF-loaded NPs administration sug­
gests a potentially favorable side-effect profile of this compound. In
addition, these results rule out the possibility that basal activity levels
are confounding the results obtained in other tests, such as TST.
Anhedonia is one of the core symptoms of depression. In the present
study, we use the SPT, which is one of the most common tests for
assessing anhedonia in rodents. Our results showed that VLF-loaded NPs
restored the deficit found in CORT–treated animals, while VLF-free drug
was not able to modify the sucrose preference. Similar results were
obtained in the total time spent immobile scored as a measure of
behavioral despair. In the TST, only the administration of VLF-loaded
NPs was able to significantly reduce the immobility time in the ani­
mals submitted to the depressive model.
The absence of antidepressant-like response found after VLF free
drug administration in the behavioral assessment was expected. Based
on previous studies, the dose selected in our study is too low to produce a
solid antidepressant effect (Coutens et al., 2022). As observed in clinical
settings, it typically takes over two weeks of antidepressant adminis­
tration to achieve a significant effect capable of reversing the depressive
phenotype induced by an animal model (David et al., 2009; Coutens
et al., 2022) . However, our results show that the same dose and regimen
of administration (1 week) of intranasal VLF-loaded NPs can produce a
clear antidepressant-like response. Thus, our results suggest that the
capsulation of VLF in PLGA NPs potentiates the antidepressant-like ef­
fect of this drug and may also be a promising strategy to reduce the onset
of action of this drug, although further research is needed.
Although we cannot determine the precise mechanism by which NPs
improve the pharmacological profile of VLF in vivo, one possibility is that
this formulation offers a long-acting controlled release. We propose that
NPs-based drug delivery systems can potentially overcome the effects of
P-glycoprotein (P-gP) in the BBB by achieving a slow release of VLF. P-
gP, an ATP dependent drug transport protein, acts as an active efflux
pump that removes substances from the brain. VLF has been shown to
induce P-gP at certain concentrations (1–50 µM) (Bachmeier et al.,
2011). In a previous study conducted by our team, we compared the
effects of increasing concentrations of free VLF versus VLF-NPs at same
dose on the basolateral side in an in vitro BBB model. Our results indi­
cated that the gradual release of VLF from NPs to the basolateral side
(drug concentration < 0.25 µM) did not reach levels sufficient to induce
P-gP (Cayero-Otero et al., 2019). This observation aligns with previous
reports suggesting that brain concentrations and the behavioral effects
induced by chronic VLF administration are influenced by the activity of
P-gP (Karlsson et al., 2011). Therefore, these data highlight the potential
of NPs-based drug delivery systems to mitigate the impact of P-gP on
VLF pharmacokinetics at the BBB. By achieving a controlled and gradual
release of VLF, these NPs effectively maintain drug concentration below
the threshold known to induce P-gP activity, as demonstrated in our in
vitro BBB model. Additionally, nanoparticles cause not only extension in
the retention time it also increases the cellular uptake. Furthermore, in
addition to its effects at the BBB level, it is conceivable that VLF
encapsulated in PLGA NPs alters its pharmacological activity at the site
of action. Recent studies suggest that the onset of the antidepressant
effect of monoaminergic reuptake inhibitors is mediated by their affinity
for the transmembrane domains of TrkB receptors (Casarotto et al.,
2021). TrkB is a receptor tyrosine kinase for brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), and the role of BDNF in mediating antidepressant-like
behavioral responses has been well-established (Castr´en and Mon­
teggia, 2021; Neto et al., 2011). Recent evidence indicates that direct
binding of antidepressant drugs to TrkB receptors promotes BDNF
signaling, potentially mediating the onset of antidepressant responses to
these compounds (Enkavi et al., 2024). This concept may explain why
typical antidepressants act slowly; they gradually accumulate in the
brain, achieving a plateau after several weeks of treatment (Karson
et al., 2006; Kornhuber et al., 1995). This suggests that clinical response
occurs only when drug concentrations in the brain are sufficiently high
to interact with low-affinity binding targets such as TrkB. Therefore, the
enhanced cellular uptake of VLF facilitated by NPs could be crucial in
increasing its binding to TrkB transmembrane domains, potentially
explaining the enhanced potency of the antidepressant effect observed
with VLF-loaded NPs in vivo.
Overall, we hypothesized that the non-invasive nose-to-brain de­
livery of our formulation would improve the antidepressant action of
VLF and be as effective as a chronic treatment of a higher dose of VLF.
6. Conclusions
PLGA NPs containing VLF could be a potential platform for the
treatment of neurological disorders, specifically for the depression. A
previous biodistribution study developed by authors, established the
presence of this type of plain-PLGA NPs in the brain after intranasal
administration and, in this work, in vivo behavioural assays have
confirmed the access of NPs to brain. The NPs prepared in the experi­
ments showed a size which not exceeding 200 nm, an essential
requirement to reach the brain by olfactory region according to the
literature. Moreover, in accordance with ISO guidelines, the prepared
PLGA-NPs nanoparticles did not exhibit cytotoxicity at the concentra­
tions tested in ONE cells.
From the in vivo studies, we can conclude that VLF-loaded NPs evoke
very fast (1 week) and robust antidepressant-like effects in CORT-treated
mice. Thus, the use of nanoparticle formulation could overcome some of
the limitations of antidepressant treatments such as the induction of
adverse effects of high doses of VLF or the slow onset of action,
improving compliance and the outcome.
Further in vivo studies in animal models are necessary to validate
these findings and confirm their real therapeutic potential, as well as the
mechanisms of the NPs that enabled a successful access to the brain, are
warranted to provide additional information for further potential opti­
mization of the formulation, as well as for the development of alterna­
tive related neurological therapies. Also, preclinical testing to assess the
safety of these NPs, including their long-term effects and cytotoxicity,
immunogenicity, and potential for bioaccumulation will be necessary.
Overall, our results highlight the potential use of plain PLGA NPs as a
novel therapy and, particularly, point to nose-to-brain administration of
plain PLGA NPs formulations as feasible and promising antidepressant
non-invasive therapy.
Funding.
This study was supported by Junta de Andalucía (2021/CTS-480;
2019/CTS-480).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
M. Dolores Cayero-Otero: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation. Laura Perez-Caballero: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation. Irene Suarez-Pereira: Writing – original draft, Investi­
gation, Formal analysis, Data curation. María Hidalgo-Figueroa:
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Alejandra
Delgado-Sequera: Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Juan
Manuel Montesinos: Methodology, Investigation. Esther Berrocoso:
Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Lucía Martín-Banderas: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
9

Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
MDC is especially grateful to the V Plan Propio de Investigaci´on from
the Vicerrectorado de Investigaci´on (Universidad de Sevilla) for the
predoctoral fellowship (grant number USE-CONV-806). Authors are also
grateful to the Biology Service of CITIUS for the technical assistance
with flow cytometry assays and Microscopy Services of CITIUS for the
technical assistance for the technical help with confocal imaging. Au­
thors also thanks funding from Junta de Andalucía (2021/CTS-480;
2019/CTS-480).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2025.125692.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Ahmad, S., Khan, I., Pandit, J., Emad, N.A., Bano, S., Dar, K.I., et al., 2022. Brain targeted
delivery of carmustine using chitosan coated nanoparticles via nasal route for
glioblastoma treatment. Int J Biol Macromol 221, 435–445. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.08.210.
Alberto M, Paiva-Santos AC, Veiga F, Pires PC. Lipid and Polymeric Nanoparticles:
Successful Strategies for Nose-to-Brain Drug Delivery in the Treatment of Depression
and Anxiety Disorders. Pharmaceutics 2022, Vol 14, Page 2742 2022;14:2742. DOI:
10.3390/PHARMACEUTICS14122742.
Bachmeier, C.J., Beaulieu-Abdelahad, D., Ganey, N.J., Mullan, M.J., Levin, G.M., 2011.
Induction of drug efflux protein expression by venlafaxine but not desvenlafaxine.
Biopharm Drug Dispos 32, 233–244. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdd.753.
Berrocoso, E., Ikeda, K., Sora, I., Uhl, G.R., S´anchez-Bl´azquez, P., Mico, J.A., 2013. Active
behaviours produced by antidepressants and opioids in the mouse tail suspension
test. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 16, 151–162. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1461145711001842.
Blanco E, Shen H, Ferrari M. Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming biological
barriers to drug delivery. Nature Biotechnology 2015 33:9 2015;33:941–51. DOI:
10.1038/nbt.3330.
Bonaccorso, A., Musumeci, T., Serapide, M.F., Pellitteri, R., Uchegbu, I.F., Puglisi, G.,
2017. Nose to brain delivery in rats: Effect of surface charge of rhodamine B labeled
nanocarriers on brain subregion localization. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 154,
297–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.03.035.
Borrajo ML, María ⋅, Alonso J. Using nanotechnology to deliver biomolecules from nose
to brain — peptides, proteins, monoclonal antibodies and RNA. Drug Deliv Transl
Res. 2022;12(4):862-880. doi: 10.1007/s13346-021-01086-2.
PMC8888512.Bruinsmann FA, de Cristo Soares Alves A, de Fraga Dias A, Lopes Silva LF,
Visioli F, Raffin Pohlmann A, et al. Nose-to-brain delivery of simvastatin mediated by
chitosan-coated lipid-core nanocapsules allows for the treatment of glioblastoma in
vivo. Int J Pharm 2022;616:121563. DOI: 10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2022.121563.
Caban, S., Aytekin, E., Sahin, A., Capan, Y., 2014. Nanosystems for drug delivery. OA
Drug Design and Delivery 2, 1–7.
Can A, Dao DT, Terrillion CE, Piantadosi SC, Bhat S, Gould TD. The Tail Suspension Test.
J Vis Exp 2012:3769. DOI: 10.3791/3769.
Casarotto, P.C., Girych, M., Fred, S.M., Kovaleva, V., Moliner, R., Enkavi, G., et al., 2021.
Antidepressant drugs act by directly binding to TRKB neurotrophin receptors. Cell
184, 1299. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CELL.2021.01.034.
Castr´en, E., Monteggia, L.M., 2021. Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Signaling in
Depression and Antidepressant Action. Biol Psychiatry 90, 128–136. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.BIOPSYCH.2021.05.008.
Cayero-Otero, M.D., Gomes, M.J., Martins, C., ´Alvarez-Fuentes, J., Fern´andez-
Ar´evalo, M., Sarmento, B., et al., 2019. In vivo biodistribution of venlafaxine-PLGA
nanoparticles for brain delivery: plain vs. functionalized nanoparticles. Expert Opin
Drug Deliv 16, 1413–1427. https://doi.org/10.1080/17425247.2019.1690452.
Chen, Y., Zhang, C., Huang, Y., Ma, Y., Song, Q., Chen, H., et al., 2024. Intranasal drug
delivery: The interaction between nanoparticles and the nose-to-brain pathway. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 207, 115196. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ADDR.2024.115196.
Choi, Y.H., Han, H.-K., 2018. Nanomedicines: current status and future perspectives in
aspect of drug delivery and pharmacokinetics. J Pharm Investig 48, 43–60. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s40005-017-0370-4.
Clementino, A.R., Pellegrini, G., Banella, S., Colombo, G., Cantù, L., Sonvico, F., et al.,
2021. Structure and Fate of Nanoparticles Designed for the Nasal Delivery of Poorly
Soluble Drugs. Mol Pharm 18, 3132–3146. https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.
MOLPHARMACEUT.1C00366/SUPPL_FILE/MP1C00366_SI_001.PDF.
Coutens B, Yrondi A, Rampon C, Guiard BP. Psychopharmacological properties and
therapeutic profile of the antidepressant venlafaxine. Psychopharmacology 2022
239:9 2022;239:2735–52. DOI: 10.1007/S00213-022-06203-8.
Crowe, T.P., Greenlee, M.H.W., Kanthasamy, A.G., Hsu, W.H., 2018. Mechanism of
intranasal drug delivery directly to the brain. Life Sci 195, 44–52. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.LFS.2017.12.025.
David, D.J., Samuels, B.A., Rainer, Q., Wang, J.-W., Marsteller, D., Mendez, I., et al.,
2009 May 28. Behavioral effects of fluoxetine in an animal model of anxiety/
depression are mediated by both neurogenesis-dependent and independent
mechanisms. Neuron 62 (4), 479–493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2009.04.017.
Delgado-Sequera A, Hidalgo-Figueroa M, Barrera-Conde M, Duran-Ruiz M aC, Castro C,
Fern´andez-Avil´es C, et al. Olfactory Neuroepithelium Cells from Cannabis Users
Display Alterations to the Cytoskeleton and to Markers of Adhesion, Proliferation
and Apoptosis. Mol Neurobiol 2021;58:1695–710. DOI: 10.1007/S12035-020-
02205-9.
Dimiou, S., Lopes, R.M., Kubajewska, I., Mellor, R.D., Schlosser, C.S., Shet, M.S., et al.,
2022. Particulate levodopa nose-to-brain delivery targets dopamine to the brain with
no plasma exposure. Int J Pharm 618, 121658. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IJPHARM.2022.121658.
Ding, S., Serra, C.A., Vandamme, T.F., Yu, W., Anton, N., 2019. Double emulsions
prepared by two–step emulsification: History, state-of-the-art and perspective.
J. Control. Release 295, 31–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCONREL.2018.12.037.
Dong, X., 2018. Current Strategies for Brain Drug Delivery. Theranostics 8, 1481–1493.
https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.21254.
Enkavi, G., Girych, M., Moliner, R., Vattulainen, I., Castr´en, E., 2024. TrkB
transmembrane domain: bridging structural understanding with therapeutic
strategy. Trends Biochem Sci 49, 445–456. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
TIBS.2024.02.001.
Entsuah, R., Derivan, A., Kikta, D., 1998. Early onset of antidepressant action of
venlafaxine: pattern analysis in intent-to-treat patients. Clin Ther 20, 517–526.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2918(98)80061-1.
Erd˝o, F., Bors, L.A., Farkas, D., Bajza, ´A., Gizurarson, S., 2018. Evaluation of intranasal
delivery route of drug administration for brain targeting. Brain Res Bull 143,
155–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BRAINRESBULL.2018.10.009.
Ferreira, N.N., de Oliveira, J.E., Granja, S., Boni, F.I., Ferreira, L.M.B., Cury, B.S.F., et al.,
2021. Nose-to-brain co-delivery of drugs for glioblastoma treatment using
nanostructured system. Int J Pharm 603, 120714. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IJPHARM.2021.120714.
Ferr´es-Coy, A., Galofr´e, M., Pilar-Cu´ellar, F., Vidal, R., Paz, V., Ruiz-Bronchal, E., et al.,
2015. Therapeutic antidepressant potential of a conjugated siRNA silencing the
serotonin transporter after intranasal administration. Mol Psychiatry 21, 328–338.
https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2015.80.
Formica, M.L., Real, D.A., Picchio, M.L., Catlin, E., Donnelly, R.F., Paredes, A.J., 2022.
On a highway to the brain: A review on nose-to-brain drug delivery using
nanoparticles. Appl Mater Today 29, 101631. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
APMT.2022.101631.
De Fraga, D.A., Dallemole, D.R., Bruinsmann, F.A., Silva, L.F.L., Cruz-L´opez, O., Conejo-
Garci´a, A., et al., 2021. Development of bozepinib-loaded nanocapsules for nose-to-
brain delivery: preclinical evaluation in glioblastoma. Https://DoiOrg/102217/
Nnm-2021-0164 16, 2095–2115. https://doi.org/10.2217/NNM-2021-0164.
G¨anger S, Schindowski K. Tailoring Formulations for Intranasal Nose-to-Brain Delivery:
A Review on Architecture, Physico-Chemical Characteristics and Mucociliary
Clearance of the Nasal Olfactory Mucosa. Pharmaceutics 2018, Vol 10, Page 116
2018;10:116. DOI: 10.3390/PHARMACEUTICS10030116.
Giunchedi P, Gavini E, Bonferoni MC. Nose-to-Brain Delivery. Pharmaceutics 2020, Vol
12, Page 138 2020;12:138. DOI: 10.3390/PHARMACEUTICS12020138.
Gourley SL, Taylor JR. Recapitulation and reversal of a persistent depression-like
syndrome in rodent. Current Protocols in Neuroscience / Editorial Board, Jacqueline
N Crawley . [et Al] 2009;CHAPTER:Unit. DOI: 10.1002/0471142301.NS0932S49.
Haque, S., Md, S., Fazil, M., Kumar, M., Sahni, J.K., Ali, J., et al., 2012. Venlafaxine
loaded chitosan NPs for brain targeting: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
evaluation. Carbohydr Polym 89, 72–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2012.02.051.
Huang, Q., Chen, X., Yu, S., Gong, G., Shu, H., 2024. Research progress in brain-targeted
nasal drug delivery. Front Aging Neurosci 15, 1341295. https://doi.org/10.3389/
FNAGI.2023.1341295.
Iqbal, M., Zafar, N., Fessi, H., Elaissari, A., 2015. Double emulsion solvent evaporation
techniques used for drug encapsulation. Int J Pharm 496, 173–190. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2015.10.057.
Jaffe, D.H., Rive, B., Denee, T.R., 2019. The humanistic and economic burden of
treatment-resistant depression in Europe: a cross-sectional study. BMC Psychiatry
19, 247. https://doi.org/10.1186/S12888-019-2222-4.
Jain, S., Datta, M., 2014. Montmorillonite-PLGA nanocomposites as an oral extended
drug delivery vehicle for venlafaxine hydrochloride. Appl Clay Sci 99, 42–47.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.2014.06.006.
Jani, P., Vanza, J., Pandya, N., Tandel, H., 2019. Formulation of polymeric nanoparticles
of antidepressant drug for intranasal delivery. Https://DoiOrg/104155/Tde-2019-
0060 10, 683–696. https://doi.org/10.4155/TDE-2019-0060.
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
10

Jha, S., Mishra, D., 2022. Evaluation of Brain Targeting Potential of Zolmitriptan
Mucoadhesive Nanoparticles for Intranasal Drug Delivery. Pharm Nanotechnol 10.
https://doi.org/10.2174/2211738510666220303160414.
Kakad, S., Kshirsagar, S., 2021. Nose to brain delivery of Efavirenz nanosuspension for
effective neuro AIDS therapy: in-vitro, in- vivo and pharmacokinetic assessment.
Heliyon 7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.HELIYON.2021.E08368.
Karlsson, L., Hiemke, C., Carlsson, B., Josefsson, M., Ahlner, J., Bengtsson, F., et al.,
2011. Effects on enantiomeric drug disposition and open-field behavior after chronic
treatment with venlafaxine in the P-glycoprotein knockout mice model.
Psychopharmacology 215, 367–377. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00213-010-2148-5/
FIGURES/4.
Karson, C.N., Newton, J.E.O., Livingston, R., Jolly, J.B., Cooper, T.B., Sprigg, J., et al.,
2006. Human brain fluoxetine concentrations. Https://DoiOrg/101176/Jnp53322 5,
322–329. https://doi.org/10.1176/JNP.5.3.322.
Kornhuber, J., Retz, W., Riederer, P., 1995. Slow accumulation of psychotropic
substances in the human brain. Relationship to therapeutic latency of neuroleptic
and antidepressant drugs? J Neural Transm Suppl.
Kumar, A., Pandey, A.N., Jain, S.K., 2014. Nasal-nanotechnology: revolution for efficient
therapeutics delivery. Drug Deliv 1–13. https://doi.org/10.3109/
10717544.2014.920431.
Lavoie, J., Gass´o Astorga, P., Segal-Gavish, H., Wu, Y.W.C., Chung, Y., Cascella, N.G.,
et al., 2017. The Olfactory Neural Epithelium as a Tool in Neuroscience. Trends Mol
Med 23, 100. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MOLMED.2016.12.010.
Li, D., Xiong, X., Zhuang, S., Du, Z., Xiong, C., Jiang, H., 2021. Preparation of bovine
serum albumin restricted access octadecyl/phenyl-mixed-functionalized magnetic
silica nanoparticles for magnetic solid phase extraction of antidepressants in aquatic
products followed by UHPLC-MS/MS. Talanta 221. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
TALANTA.2020.121458.
Li, X., Li, S., Ma, C., Li, T., Yang, L., 2022. Preparation of baicalin-loaded ligand-modified
nanoparticles for nose-to-brain delivery for neuroprotection in cerebral ischemia.
Https://DoiOrg/101080/1071754420222064564 29, 1282–1298. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10717544.2022.2064564.
Lipid P, Alberto M, Cl´audia Paiva-Santos A, Veiga F, Pires PC. Citation: Lipid and
Polymeric Nanoparticles: Successful Strategies for Nose-to-Brain Drug Delivery in
the Treatment of Depression and Anxiety Disorders 2022. DOI: 10.3390/
pharmaceutics14122742.
Liu, L., Liu, M., Xiu, J., Zhang, B., Hu, H., Qiao, M., et al., 2023. Stimuli-responsive
nanoparticles delivered by a nasal-brain pathway alleviate depression-like behavior
through extensively scavenging ROS. Acta Biomater 171, 451–465. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.ACTBIO.2023.09.038.
Liu, M.Y., Yin, C.Y., Zhu, L.J., Zhu, X.H., Xu, C., Luo, C.X., et al., 2018. Sucrose
preference test for measurement of stress-induced anhedonia in mice. Nat Protoc 13,
1686–1698. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-0011-z.
Lu, Y., Tzu, J., Wang, W., Li, N., Zhu, X., Li, Y., et al., 2023. Intranasal administration of
edaravone nanoparticles improves its stability and brain bioavailability. J. Control.
Release 359, 257–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2023.06.001.
Malhi, G.S., Mann, J.J., 2018. Depression. Lancet 392, 2299–2312. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31948-2.
Martín-Banderas L, Cayero-Otero M, Fern´andez-Ar´evalo M, Berrocoso-Domínguez E,
P´erez-Caballero L, Mic´o-Segura J. Pharmaceutical composition for use in the
intranasal treatment of depression. PCT/ES2020/070209, 2020.
Martín-Banderas, L., S´aez-Fern´andez, E., Holgado, M.´A., Dur´an-Lobato, M.M., Prados, J.
C., Melguizo, C., et al., 2013. Biocompatible gemcitabine-based nanomedicine
engineered by Flow Focusing® for efficient antitumor activity. Int J Pharm 443,
103–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2012.12.048.
Mittal, D., Ali, A., Md, S., Baboota, S., Sahni, J.K., Ali, J., 2014. Insights into direct nose
to brain delivery: current status and future perspective. Drug Deliv 21, 75–86.
https://doi.org/10.3109/10717544.2013.838713.
Mosmann, T., 1983. Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival:
Application to proliferation and cytotoxicity assays. J Immunol Methods 65, 55–63.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1759(83)90303-4.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2022. Depression in adults: treatment
and management | Guidance | NICE. NICE Guideline 1–111.
Neto, F.L., Borges, G., Torres-Sanchez, S., Mico, J.A., Berrocoso, E., 2011. Neurotrophins
Role in Depression Neurobiology: A Review of Basic and Clinical Evidence. Curr
Neuropharmacol 9, 530–552.
Oliveira-Maia, A.J., Bobrowska, A., Constant, E., Ito, T., Kambarov, Y., Luedke, H., et al.,
2023. Treatment-Resistant Depression in Real-World Clinical Practice: A Systematic
Literature Review of Data from 2012 to 2022. Adv Ther 41, 34. https://doi.org/
10.1007/S12325-023-02700-0.
Pandey PSA; ;, Falconer JR;, Siskind DJ;, Balmanno A ;, Parekh H S, Dinu MV, et al.
Clozapine-Encapsulated Binary Mixed Micelles in Thermosensitive Sol&ndash;Gels
for Intranasal Administration. Gels 2022, Vol 8, Page 38 2022;8:38. DOI: 10.3390/
GELS8010038.
Patra, J.K., Das, G., Fernandes Fraceto, L., Vangelie, E., Campos, R., Del Pilar, R.-T., et al.,
2018. Nano based drug delivery systems: recent developments and future prospects.
J Nanobiotechnology 16, 71. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-018-0392-8.
Pires, P.C., Santos, A.O., 2018. Nanosystems in nose-to-brain drug delivery: A review of
non-clinical brain targeting studies. J. Control. Release 270, 89–100. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.11.047.
Posternak, M.A., Zimmerman, M., 2005. Is There a Delay in the Antidepressant Effect?
A Meta-Analysis. J Clin Psychiatry 66, 148–158.
Redrobe, J.P., Bourin, M., Colombel, M.C., Baker, G.B., 1998. Dose-dependent
noradrenergic and serotonergic properties of venlafaxine in animal models
indicative of antidepressant activity. Psychopharmacology 138, 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1007/S002130050638/METRICS.
Ruby, J.J., Pandey, V.P., 2016. Formulation and evaluation of olanzapine loaded
chitosan nanoparticles for nose to brain targeting an in vitro and ex vivo toxicity
study. J Appl Pharm Sci 6, 34–040. https://doi.org/10.7324/JAPS.2016.60905.
Serralheiro, A., Alves, G., Fortuna, A., Falc˜ao, A., 2015. Direct nose-to-brain delivery of
lamotrigine following intranasal administration to mice. Int J Pharm 490, 39–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2015.05.021.
Shah, P., Dubey, P., Vyas, B., Kaul, A., Mishra, A.K., Chopra, D., et al., 2021. Lamotrigine
loaded PLGA nanoparticles intended for direct nose to brain delivery in epilepsy:
pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic and scintigraphy study. Https://DoiOrg/
101080/2169140120211939709 49, 511–522. https://doi.org/10.1080/
21691401.2021.1939709.
Sharma, S., Tyagi, A., Dang, S., 2023. Nose to Brain Delivery of Transferrin conjugated
PLGA nanoparticles for clonidine. Int J Biol Macromol 252, 126471. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126471.
Shukla, R., Kumar, A., Flora, S.J.S., 2021. Nanotechnological advances in direct nose-to-
brain drug delivery for neurodegenerative disorders and other neuroailments. Direct
Nose-to-Brain Drug Delivery 73–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822522-
6.00005-9.
Sorrentino A, Cataldo A, Curatolo R, Tagliatesta P, Mosca L, Bellucci S. Novel optimized
biopolymer-based nanoparticles for nose-to-brain delivery in the treatment of
depressive diseases † 2020. DOI: 10.1039/d0ra04212a.
Steru L, Chermat R, Thierry B, Simon P. The tail suspension test: A new method for
screening antidepressants in mice. vol. 85. 1985.
Stetefeld, J., McKenna, S.A., Patel, T.R., 2016. Dynamic light scattering: a practical guide
and applications in biomedical sciences. Biophys Rev 8, 409–427. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12551-016-0218-6.
Sunena, S.SK., Mishra, D.N., 2018. Nose to Brain Delivery of Galantamine Loaded
Nanoparticles: In-vivo Pharmacodynamic and Biochemical Study in Mice. Curr Drug
Deliv 16, 51–58. https://doi.org/10.2174/1567201815666181004094707.
Szab´o-R´ev´esz P, Jin Z, Han Y, Zhang D, Li Z, Jing Y, et al. Citation: Application of
Intranasal Administration in the Delivery of Antidepressant Active Ingredients.
Pharmaceutics 2070;2022. DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14102070.
Tong, G.F., Qin, N., Sun, L.W., 2017. Development and evaluation of Desvenlafaxine
loaded PLGA-chitosan nanoparticles for brain delivery. Saudi Pharmaceutical
Journal 25, 844–851. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JSPS.2016.12.003.
Trapani A, Cometa S, De Giglio E, Corbo F, Cassano R, Di Gioia ML, et al. Novel
Nanoparticles Based on N,O-Carboxymethyl Chitosan-Dopamine Amide Conjugate
for Nose-to-Brain Delivery. Pharmaceutics 2022, Vol 14, Page 147 2022;14:147.
DOI: 10.3390/PHARMACEUTICS14010147.
Upadhyay, R., Ghosh, P., Desavathu, M., 2024. Advancement in the Nose-to-Brain Drug
delivery of FDA-approved drugs for the better management of Depression and
Psychiatric disorders. Int J Pharm 667, 124866. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IJPHARM.2024.124866.
Vitorino, C., Silva, S., Gouveia, F., Bicker, J., Falc˜ao, A., Fortuna, A., 2020. QbD-Driven
Development of Intranasal Lipid Nanoparticles for Depression Treatment. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.04.011.
Wang, L., Xu, L., Du, J., Zhao, X., Liu, M., Feng, J., et al., 2021. Nose-to-brain delivery of
borneol modified tanshinone IIA nanoparticles in prevention of cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion injury. Drug Deliv 28, 1363. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10717544.2021.1943058.
Wang, Z., Xiong, G., Tsang, W.C., Sch¨atzlein, A.G., Uchegbu, I.F., 2019. Nose-to-brain
delivery. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 370, 593–601.
https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.119.258152.
Watanabe, Y., Asami, Y., Hirano, Y., Kuribayashi, K., Itamura, R., Imaeda, T., 2018.
Factors impacting the efficacy of venlafaxine extended release 75–225 mg/day in
patients with major depressive disorder: exploratory post hoc subgroup analyses of a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in Japan. Neuropsychiatr Dis
Treat 14, 1261–1272. https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S146428.
Xinchen, Y., Jing, T., Jiaoqiong, G., 2023. Lipid-based nanoparticles via nose-to-brain
delivery: a mini review. Front Cell Dev Biol 11, 1214450. https://doi.org/10.3389/
FCELL.2023.1214450/BIBTEX.
Xu, J., Tao, J., Wang, J., 2020. Design and Application in Delivery System of Intranasal
Antidepressants. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 8, 1450. https://doi.org/10.3389/
FBIOE.2020.626882/BIBTEX.
Yadav, R.K., Shah, K., Dewangan, H.K., 2022. Intranasal Drug Delivery of Sumatriptan
Succinate Loaded Polymeric Solid Lipid Nanoparticles for Brain Targeting. Https://
DoiOrg/101080/0363904520222090575 1 –22. https://doi.org/10.1080/
03639045.2022.2090575.
Yokel, R.A., 2022. Direct nose to the brain nanomedicine delivery presents a formidable
challenge. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 14. https://doi.org/
10.1002/WNAN.1767.
Yousfan A, Rubio N, Al-Ali M, Nattouf AH, Kafa H. Intranasal delivery of phenytoin-
loaded nanoparticles to the brain suppresses pentylenetetrazol-induced generalized
tonic clonic seizures in an epilepsy mouse model † 2021. DOI: 10.1039/
d1bm01251g.
Zambaux, M.F., Bonneaux, F., Gref, R., Maincent, P., Dellacherie, E., Alonso, M.J., et al.,
1998. Influence of experimental parameters on the characteristics of poly(lactic
acid) nanoparticles prepared by a double emulsion method. J. Control. Release 50,
31–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-3659(97)00106-5.
Zhang, Q., Wei, E., Zhu, C., Zhang, S., Zhang, W., Yu, Y., et al., 2022. A novel method for
continuously assessing the spatio-temporal properties of locomotor activity in mice.
Journal of Zhejiang University (medical Sciences) 33, 509–514. https://doi.org/
10.3785/J.ISSN.1008-9292.2004.06.009.
Zhao, Y., Ma, R., Shen, J., Su, H., Xing, D., Du, L., 2008. A mouse model of depression
induced by repeated corticosterone injections. Eur J Pharmacol 581, 113–120.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EJPHAR.2007.12.005.
M.D. Cayero-Otero et al.
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 678 (2025) 125692
11