Hyaluronidase-Loaded PLGA Microparticles
as a New Strategy for the Treatment of Pulmonary Fibrosis
Claudia da Silva Bitencourt, PhD,1,5 Guilherme Martins Gelfuso, PhD,2 Priscilla Aparecida Tartari Pereira, PhD,1
Patrı´cia Aparecida de Assis, PhD,1 Cristiane Tefe´-Silva, PhD,3 Simone Gusma˜o Ramos, PhD,3
Eliane Candiani Arantes, PhD,4 and Lu´cia Helena Faccioli, PhD1
The aim of this work was to develop an innovative tool for the treatment of pulmonary ﬁbrosis based on our
previous ﬁndings, which demonstrated that intranasally administered soluble bovine hyaluronidase (HYAL)
increases the numbers of mesenchymal (MSC)-like cells in the bronchoalveolar ﬂuid (BALF) and thus reduces
the bleomycin-induced ﬁbrosis. To this end, we developed poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) micropar-
ticles (MPs) loaded with HYAL (HYAL-MP) to preserve the enzyme’s biological activity and to facilitate its
delivery to the lung. Nonloaded MPs (Control-MPs) and HYAL-MPs were prepared using the emulsion and
solvent evaporation methods and thoroughly characterized. The HYAL-MPs and Control-MPs exhibited an
average diameter of 4.3 – 2.1 and 4.4 – 1.5 mm, respectively. The encapsulation efﬁciency of the HYAL-MPs
was 68%, and encapsulation led to a reduced release rate. Additionally, the HYAL-MPs were efﬁciently
phagocytosed by J-774.1 cells. Compared with the soluble HYAL, the HYAL-MPs increased the proportion of
MSC-like cells in the BALF of C57BL6 mice 96 h after treatment. The efﬁcacy of the HYAL-MPs was also
tested in C57BL6 mice that were previously exposed to 4 U/kg of bleomycin to induce lung ﬁbrosis. The results
demonstrated that the HYAL-MPs reduced neutrophil recruitment after bleomycin treatment more effectively
than did the soluble HYAL, whereas the Control-MPs did not exhibit any effect. The HYAL-MPs also reduced
the bleomycin-induced ﬁbrosis more efﬁciently, and 134% of the collagen deposition in the lung compared with
the soluble HYAL and the Control-MPs. In summary, our data indicate that HYAL-MPs are an effective
delivery system that could feasibly be used in the treatment of pulmonary ﬁbrosis.
Introduction
A
lthough idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF) is the
most common interstitial pneumonia, the cause of IPF
remains unknown. The disease may be triggered by epi-
thelial injury and apoptosis, unpaired re-epithelization, or
aberrant wound healing, but its pathogenesis is poorly un-
derstood.1 Transforming growth factor (TGF), ﬁbroblasts,
and myoﬁbroblasts mainly contribute to excessive extra-
cellular matrix and collagen deposition, which disrupts the
lung architecture.2,3 The prevalence of IPF is 13 to 20 cases
per 100,000 individuals, and the incidence is increasing with
a survival time of 3 to 5 years after diagnosis.1,4 Despite the
morbidity of this disease, few therapies have successfully
improved the survival and quality of life of IPF patients,
which has resulted in a continued search for new therapies.5
Hyaluronidase (HYAL) has been widely used in therapy
due to its ability to spread drugs in certain tissues, increase
vascular permeability, and reduce the viscosity of biological
ﬂuids.6,7 In mammals, HYAL is a component of urine,
plasma, and seminal ﬂuid,8 whereas, in poisonous animals,
the enzyme is a nontoxic component of venoms that is
important to the envenomation process.8 In contrast, in
bacteria, HYAL is considered a virulence factor.9 HYAL
regulates the hyaluronic acid levels and the remodeling of
the extracellular matrix.8,10
We recently demonstrated that IPF therapy using soluble
bovine HYAL decreased bleomycin-induced ﬁbrosis, which
indicates a new use for this enzyme.11 We also established
that a single intranasal dose of soluble HYAL increased
mesenchymal (MSC)-like cells and ameliorated pulmonary
ﬁbrosis, speciﬁcally through the reduction of collagen
1Departamento de Ana´lises Clı´nicas, Toxicolo´gicas e Bromatolo´gicas, Faculdade de Cieˆncias Farmaceˆuticas de Ribeira˜o Preto,
Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo,- Ribeira˜o Preto, Brazil.
2Departamento de Cieˆncias Farmaceˆuticas, Faculdade de Cieˆncias da Sau´de, Universidade de Brası´lia, Brası´lia, Brazil.
3Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeira˜o Preto, Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo, Ribeira˜o Preto, Brazil.
4Departamento de Fı´sica e Quı´mica, Faculdade de Cieˆncias Farmaceˆuticas de Ribeira˜o Preto, Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo, Ribeira˜o Preto,
Brazil.
5Centro Universita´rio das Faculdades Associadas de Ensino (FAE) Sa˜o Joa˜o da Boa Vista, Brazil.
TISSUE ENGINEERING: Part A
Volume 21, Numbers 1 and 2, 2015
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ten.tea.2013.0403
246
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

deposition and TGF-b production.11 However, HYAL is
easily degraded,12 which renders it difﬁcult to use for the
treatment of ﬁbrosis.
Poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)-based micropar-
ticles (MPs) have been extensively used as carriers for the
controlled delivery of therapeutics, such as proteins, pep-
tides, genes, growth factors, and lipids.13–15 Additionally,
certain pharmaceutical and biomedical products composed
of PLGA have already been approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for use in humans (e.g., Re-
somer and Lactel).16
Proteins have been successfully entrapped in MPs and
used as vaccines or therapies. We recently developed MPs
containing cell-free antigens from Histoplasma capsulatum
that have great potential as a vaccine because these MPs
efﬁciently activate mononuclear cells.17,18 It is known that
microencapsulation protects proteins, lipids, and drugs from
degradation and enhances their potency and efﬁcacy.13–15
The entrapment of proteins and other products in delivery
systems speciﬁcally increases the potency of vaccines and
therapies by preserving the stability and biological activity
of the encapsulated agents.
The delivery of proteins with therapeutic potential through
the inhalation route is a challenge and considered the most
promising noninvasive route. The major problems associated
with this delivery route are the clearance of the delivery
system by alveolar macrophages and the mucociliary appa-
ratus and the correct delivery to the lung airways.19,20 To
avoid these problems, optimal aerodynamic properties must
be achieved to ensure that the MPs reach the deep lungs
when inhaled.20 The efﬁcient drug delivery to the lungs is
driven by the particle size, shape, deposition, dissolution, and
clearance metabolism of the lung drug delivery system.21
In this study, we developed an innovative strategy to treat
pulmonary ﬁbrosis by encapsulating HYAL in PLGA MPs,
which would both preserve the activity of HYAL and increase
the potency of the enzyme’s effects. Our results demonstrate
that the encapsulated enzyme was more powerful than soluble
HYAL in decreasing lung inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis.
Materials and Methods
Animals
C57BL6 mice (20–25 g) were obtained from the facilities
of the Faculdade de Cieˆncias Farmaceˆuticas de Ribeira˜o
Preto, Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo. The experiments were
conducted according to the guidelines of the Animal Care
Committee of the Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo (Protocol No.
07.1.782.53.8).
MP preparation
The MPs loaded with HYAL were prepared using the
double emulsion and solvent evaporation technique. Brieﬂy,
120 mg of polymer (PLGA 50:50) was dissolved in 10 mL of
methylene dichloride, and this mixture was emulsiﬁed with
0.2 mL of an inner aqueous phase containing bovine HYAL
(2.75 mg) using an Ultra-Turrax T-25 homogenizer (IKA
Labortechnik). The emulsion was then poured into 40 mL of
PVA solution in water (3%, w/v). This ﬁnal double emulsion
was stirred at 600 rpm for 4 h using an RW-20 homogenizer
(IKA Labortechnik) to induce solvent evaporation. The MPs
were then collected, washed for 6 min at 23,600 g with sterile
water, and freeze-dried by lyophilization during 24 h for
storage at - 20C. The control MPs, which did not contain
HYAL, were prepared using the same method. All of the
MPs were prepared under sterile conditions.
MP characterization
The diameters of the HYAL-MPs and Control-MPs were
determined using an LS 13 320 Laser Diffraction Particle
Size Analyzer (Beckman Coulter). The zeta potentials were
characterized using a Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments).
In both cases, 1 mg of MPs was dispersed in 0.4 mL of
distilled water and analyzed at 25C. The morphologies of
the dried MPs were assessed by scanning electron micros-
copy using a Zeiss Scanning Microscope (Evo 50). Before
being taken to the microscope, 3 mg of the liophylized MPs
were sprinkled on a platform and coated with gold.
HYAL encapsulation efﬁciency.
The encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency (EE%) of the HYAL-MPs was assessed by dissolving
10 mg of the MPs in 0.6 mL of acetonitrile under agitation to
disrupt them. The acetonitrile was then dried using a Con-
centrator plus (Eppendorf) and 1 mL of water was added
to dissolve HYAL and precipitate the polymer PLGA. The
mixture was ﬁltered using a 0.22 mm membrane and
the HYAL concentration were indirectly quantiﬁed using a
Coomassie protein assay kit. The EE% was calculated based
on the following formula:
EE% ¼ (total amount of protein detected in MPs=
total amount of protein theoretically
associated with MPs) · 100
HYAL release rate.
The HYAL release rate was assessed
using a modiﬁed Franz-type diffusion cell (Microette;
Hanson Research) and a cellulose acetate membrane with a
pore size of 0.45 mm (Fisher). Three milligrams of HYAL-
MPs were suspended in 300 mL of saline buffer and placed
on the membrane in the donor compartment. Samples
(1 mL) were collected at 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 24, and
48 h, and the diffusion of soluble HYAL was analyzed using
a Coomassie protein assay kit. The same experiment was
performed using nonloaded bovine HYAL. The enzymatic
activity of the HYAL released from the MPs was also tur-
bidimetrically assessed following the protocol described by
Bordon et al.22
Endotoxin measurements.
The possible presence of
lipopolysaccharide in the MPs was assessed using a
Limulus amebocyte lysate test following the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Cellular uptake of MPs
J-774 cells were cultured (2 · 105 cells/well) in 24-well
plates with a 13-mm circular cover slip in each well. After
1 h, the medium was removed, and 1 mL of a 1 mg/mL
dispersion of HYAL-MPs or Control-MPs in RPMI-1640
was added. After 4 h, the noningested MPs were gently
washed away. The cover slips were stained with Panoptic. In
MICROPARTICLES OF HYALURONIDASE TO TREAT PULMONARY FIBROSIS
247
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

some sets of experiments, the uptake was inhibited using
5 mg/mL/well of cytochalasin D. The MP uptake was as-
sessed by counting 200 cells that did or did not ingest the
MPs and the total number of engulfed MPs. The phagocytic
index (PI) was calculated as follows: PI = number of en-
gulfed MPs · number of cells containing at least one MP/
total number of cells counted.
Experimental design and treatments
In one set of experiments, mice were intranasally (i.n.)
inoculated with 16 U of soluble HYAL or 2 mg of HYAL-
MPs. The controls received phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
or 2 mg of Control-MPs. The amount of 2 mg of MP is
equivalent to 16U of HYAL as determined by % encapsu-
lation. All of the preparations were administered in a volume
of 20mL of sterile PBS that was slowly dropped into the nasal
cavity of the mice. Ninety-six hours after the treatment, the
animals were euthanized. In another set of experiments,
bleomycin sulfate was administered intratracheally (4 U/kg in
0.9% NaCl in a total volume of 100mL).11,23 After 8 days of
bleomycin treatment, the animals were treated i.n. with 16 U
of soluble HYAL, 2 mg of HYAL-MPs, 2 mg of Control-MPs,
or PBS. Ninety-six hours after treatment, the animals were
euthanized. The cells from the bronchoalveolar space were
collected, stained, and counted as previously described.11
Immunophenotyping of cells.
The expression levels of
CD34, CD73, SCA-1 (Ly-6AE), and CD90.1 on the surface
of the cells from the bronchoalveolar ﬂuid (BALF) were
determined through immunostaining and ﬂow cytometry, as
previously described.11
Cytokine measurement.
Interleukin (IL)-13, tumor necro-
sis factor (TNF)-a, TGF-b, monocyte chemotactic protein-1
(MCP-1), and keratinocyte chemoattractant (KC) were as-
sessed in the lung homogenates of the C57BL6 mice by
ELISA according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BD
Biosciences). The sensitivity of the assays was > 10 pg/mL.
Collagen assay.
The soluble collagen in the supernatants
of the homogenates of the lung parenchyma was quantiﬁed
as previously described.11,24
Analysis of gene expression by real-time polymerase
chain reaction.
The total RNA was isolated from the lung
tissue using the TRIzol reagent according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions. The reverse transcription of 1 mg of RNA
was performed using a high-capacity cDNA archive kit.
Subsequently, the mRNA expression of Tgfb1 and Tgfbr1
was evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
using the TaqMan method, and all of the samples were
processed in duplicate. The probes used for the ampliﬁcation
were synthesized by an Assays-on-Demand system (Applied
Biosystems) based on the following GenBank sequences:
Tgfb1 (NM_011577.1) and Tgfbr1 (NM_009370.2). The
Hprt (NM_008722.2) probe was included as an endogenous
control. The PCR analysis used the StepOnePlus Real-
Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems), and the 2–DDCT
method was used to evaluate the PCR data and the relative
gene expression in a particular sample as follows: relative
amount of target = 2–DDCT.
Histopathological analysis.
The lungs of the mice were
ﬁxed in formalin 10%. After 48 h the specimens were pro-
cessed routinely and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) and Picro Sirius Red. The surface density of the
collagen ﬁbers in the lung was determined by assessing
optical density. More speciﬁcally, images were captured
using a video camera (Leica Microsystems) coupled to a
microscope DMR (Leica Microsystems GmbH) and a
computer. These images were processed using Leica QWin
software (Leica Microsystems Image Solutions). After en-
hancing the contrast to a point at which the ﬁbers were
easily identiﬁable as red bands, the thresholds for the col-
lagen ﬁbers were established for each slide. Ten randomly
chosen, no coincident ﬁelds were measured at a magniﬁ-
cation of 200 · across a frame area of 0.28 mm2. The re-
sultant values were expressed as a percentage of the area.24,25
Statistical analysis
The data were expressed as the mean – standard error of
the mean. The statistical variations were determined using
Student’s t-test or analysis of variance and the Newman–
Keuls post test. The results were analyzed using the
GraphPad Prism 5.0 software, and differences with p < 0.05
were considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Results
First, we encapsulated HYAL in PLGA MPs. The HYAL-
MPs exhibited a mean hydrodynamic diameter characterized
using laser diffraction of 4.3 – 2.1 mm with a monomodal
distribution. Similarly, the Control-MPs, which did not en-
capsulate HYAL, presented an average diameter of 4.4 –
1.5 mm (Table 1). The zeta potential of the Control-MPs
was - 21.7 – 4.4 mV, and this surface charge was modiﬁed
to - 2.6 – 7.8mV by the incorporation of HYAL. This neu-
tralization of the particles’ surface charge indicates that there
may be an interaction between the polymer and HYAL,
which suggests a successful drug encapsulation. HYAL
seems to modify the negative electric load of the polymer.
Figure 1 depicts photomicrographs of the Control-MPs
(Fig. 1B, C) and the HYAL-MPs (Fig. 1D, E). All of the
particles were reasonably spherical in shape, and the images
conﬁrm the size range of the particles, as determined by
laser diffraction. The encapsulation efﬁciency of the HYAL-
MPs was 68% – 5%, which was interesting considering the
method of double emulsiﬁcation. Figure 1A also shows the
HYAL release proﬁle for the MPs compared with the dis-
solution/diffusion of nonencapsulated HYAL. The MPs
reduced the release rate of the enzyme in a progressive,
zero-order manner (r = 0.99). HYAL was speciﬁcally re-
leased from the MPs with a calculated ﬂux of 0.88%/h. It
is important to mention that our in vitro analysis was
Table 1. Mean Diameter (mm) and Zeta Potential
(mV) of HYAL-MPs in Comparison
with Control-MPs
Mean diameter (lm)
Zeta potential (mV)
HYAL-MPs
4.3 – 2.1
- 2.6 – 7.8
Control-MPs
4.4 – 1.5
- 21.7 – 4.4
HYAL, hyaluronidase; MPs, microparticles.
248
BITENCOURT ET AL.
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

performed during 48 h; however, at this time point there was
an incomplete release of HYAL because a plateau was not
observed in the HYAL-MP curve. The HYAL activity re-
mained higher than 80% in all of the samples, which shows
that the encapsulation process did not signiﬁcantly alter the
activity. The endotoxin levels detected in the MPs were
lower than 0.1 EU/kg, which indicates that the MPs were
adequate for therapeutic use based on the criteria of the
European Pharmacopoeia (5 EU/kg/h is the safety level
required for endovenous administration). Taken together,
the data show that the delivery system developed in this
work is appropriate for the intranasal administration of
HYAL and could be used therapeutically.
Our next in vitro studies were designed to determine
whether the HYAL-MPs would be recognized and efﬁ-
ciently phagocytosed by macrophages. To achieve this
objective, we used J-774 cells, which are of a murine
macrophage lineage. Figure 2 shows that the HYAL-MPs
were properly recognized and phagocytosed by macro-
phages. Moreover, the macrophages internalized the HYAL-
MPs more frequently than the Control-MPs (Fig. 2A, B).
Figure 2C shows that the addition of cytochalasin D to the
culture inhibited the uptake, which demonstrates that both
preparations entered the macrophage via phagocytosis.
We then determined whether the effects of the HYAL-
MPs on the healthy lung microenvironment were similar to
the effects of soluble HYAL. Mice were intranasally inoc-
ulated with a single dose of 16 U of HYAL, 2 mg of HYAL-
MPs, or 2 mg of Control-MPs. The BALF cells were
recovered 96 h after treatment. The soluble HYAL induced a
late and nearly exclusive increase in mononuclear cells in
the BALF, and the HYAL-MPs presented the same pattern
of cell recruitment (Fig. 3B). This ﬁnding shows that the
biological effect of HYAL was preserved after encapsula-
tion. As expected, the Control-MPs did not augment the
mononuclear cell numbers in the lung 96 h after inoculation
(Fig. 3B).
Using ﬂow cytometry, we also examined whether the
cells in the BALF of the mice treated with soluble HYAL,
HYAL-MPs, or Control-MPs were MSC-like 96 h after the
inoculation. The cells were incubated with antibodies
against CD34, CD73, SCA-1 (Ly-6AE), and CD90.1, which
is a panel of antigens used to characterize MSC-like cells.
We observed important differences between the cells in-
duced by the three stimuli (Fig. 3D). When the inoculations
with the soluble HYAL and HYAL-MPs were compared,
the overlaid histograms indicated marked disparities in the
expression of the cell surface markers. More speciﬁcally, the
expression of CD73, CD90.1, and SCA-1 on the surface of
the BALF cells after HYAL-MP inoculation (green histo-
gram) was higher than the expression following soluble
HYAL treatment (blue histogram). Additionally, by com-
paring the expression of CD73, CD90.1, and SCA-1 after
HYAL-MP administration, we noticed that the CD90.1
surface expression on the BALF cells was higher than the
CD73 and SCA-1 expression, and different results were
obtained after soluble HYAL administration. To investigate
possible inﬂammation in the lung parenchyma, the tissue
obtained from mice inoculated with PBS, soluble HYAL,
HYAL-MPs, or Control-MPs was stained with H&E. As
observed in Figure 3C, inoculation with the Control-MPs or
HYAL-MPs did not change the cells in the lung parenchyma
compared with PBS inoculation.
Given that the cells in the BALF of mice inoculated with
the HYAL-MPs or soluble HYAL were phenotypically
similar to MSCs, we further analyzed the potential to
FIG. 1.
Characterization of HYAL-MP. (A) The release proﬁle of HYAL from the HYAL-MPs compared with the
diffusion of nonloaded HYAL (Free-HYAL). The data are presented as the mean – SD of three replicates. Scanning electron
microscopy images of the (B, C) HYAL-MPs and (D, E) Control-MPs. The MPs shown are representative of the different
batches. HYAL, hyaluronidase; MPs, microparticles.
MICROPARTICLES OF HYALURONIDASE TO TREAT PULMONARY FIBROSIS
249
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

diminish bleomycin-induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis. The mice
were exposed to bleomycin on day 0, and, 8 days after
bleomycin exposure, the mice were treated intranasally with
a single dose of sterile PBS, soluble HYAL, HYAL-MPs, or
Control-MPs. The BALF was recovered 96 h after the
treatment, and the BALF cells were enumerated to conﬁrm
the presence of inﬂammatory exsudate. The period after the
treatments exhibited an increase in the proportion of MSC-
like cells in the BALF after inoculation with the postsoluble
HYAL or HYAL-MPs. As expected, the soluble HYAL
caused an insigniﬁcant reduction in neutrophil recruitment
following bleomycin exposure. In contrast, the HYAL-MPs
signiﬁcantly reduced the number of these cells (Fig. 4A),
and this was followed by a signiﬁcant decrease in mono-
nuclear cells (Fig. 4B) compared with the PBS or soluble
HYAL treatments. The total soluble collagen assayed using
Sircol was decreased in mice treated with either soluble
HYAL or HYAL-MPs compared with the PBS-treated ani-
mals (Fig. 4C).
The cytokines involved in the progression of lung ﬁbrosis
were also evaluated after bleomycin exposure and soluble
HYAL, HYAL-MPs, or Control-MPs treatment. The MCP-
1, IL-13, TNF-a, and KC levels were not signiﬁcantly al-
tered by these treatments compared with mice inoculated
with bleomycin and treated with sterile PBS (Fig. 5A–D).
However, a signiﬁcant decrease in the TGF-b concentration
was observed in the lung homogenates after the soluble
HYAL or HYAL-MPs treatment compared with the PBS
treatment (Fig. 6A). In addition, we observed signiﬁcant
reduction in the mRNA expression of Tgfb1 and Tgfbr1
(Fig. 6B, C).
Finally, we analyzed the morphology of the lung and
collagen deposition after the inoculation of bleomycin and
either HYAL, HYAL-MPs, Control-MPs, or PBS treatment.
Histopathological analysis of the lungs of the mice inocu-
lated with bleomycin and treated with sterile PBS revealed
subpleural and parenchymal foci of inﬂammation and ﬁ-
brosis (Fig. 7). In contrast, the soluble HYAL treatment
reduced the bleomycin-induced ﬁbrosis and collagen depo-
sition. Unexpectedly, the treatment with the HYAL-MPs led
to a more marked reduction in the lung inﬂammation and
collagen deposition compared with the treatment with the
soluble HYAL. As mentioned before, the total soluble col-
lagen was also decreased in mice treated with either soluble
HYAL or HYAL-MPs. Additionally, the collagen deposi-
tion in the tissue was measured using Picrosirius Red, and a
FIG. 2.
MPs are recognized by phagocytic cells by mechanisms dependent on cytoskeleton. (A) The uptake of Control-
MPs and HYAL-MPs by J-774 cells after 4 h of incubation. Brieﬂy, J-774 cells were plated (2 · 105 cells/well) and after 1 h,
1 mg/mL HYAL-MPs or Control-MPs were added. After 4 h, cells were stained. The phagocytic index was then calculated as
described in the Materials and Methods section. The values represent the mean – SEM from one representative result of three
independent experiments (n = 6; p = 0.0002 compared with the Control-MPs, as determined using Student’s t-test). (B) The
percentages of J-774 cells that engulfed at least one MP. The values denote the mean – SEM from one representative result of
three independent experiments (n = 6; p = 0.0002 compared with the Control-MPs, as determined using Student’s t-test). (C)
Uptake of the Control-MPs and HYAL-MPs by J-774 cells was inhibited by cytochalasin D, a cytoskeleton inhibitor. Brieﬂy,
J-774 cells were plated (2 · 105 cells/well). After 1 h, 5 mg/mL/well of cytochalasin D was added, and, after 30 min, 1 mg/mL
HYAL-MPs or Control-MPs in RPMI-1640 were added. After 4 h, cells were stained with Panoptic. The phagocytic index
was then calculated. The values express the mean – SEM from one representative result of two independent experiments
(n = 6; &p < 0.001 and *p < 0.01 compared with the Control-MPs, #p < 0.001 compared with the HYAL-MPs. One-way
ANOVA was used. (D) Representative photomicrographs of J-774 cells that phagocytized Control-MPs or HYAL-MPs. The
cells on glass slides were stained with Panoptic and photographed using light microscope. Magniﬁcation: 100 · /1.25 oil.
ANOVA, analysis of variance; SEM, standard error of the mean. Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/tea
250
BITENCOURT ET AL.
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

greater decrease was observed after the HYAL-MPs treat-
ment compared with the soluble HYAL treatment (Fig. 4D).
Taken together, these data show that both the soluble HYAL
and the HYAL-MPs signiﬁcantly reduced the bleomycin-
induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Our results also demonstrate
that the soluble HYAL and the HYAL-MPs reduced the
histopathological manifestation of lung ﬁbrosis by decreas-
ing the neutrophil numbers, the collagen content, and the
TGF-b production.
The H&E staining revealed subpleural and parenchymal
foci of inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis in the mice inoculated with
bleomycin, and these foci were more reduced after the
HYAL-MP treatment compared with the soluble HYAL
treatment (Fig. 7A). The same pattern of decreased ﬁbrosis
was observed in the lungs stained with Picrosirius Red,
which labels collagen deposition (Fig. 7B). Additionally, as
mentioned previously, the measured collagen deposition in
the tissue showed that the HYAL-MPs were more effective
than the soluble HYAL in decreasing this deposition be-
cause the HYAL-MP treatment resulted in a 134% decrease
in the amount of deposited collagen compared with that
obtained with soluble HYAL. Additionally, HYAL-MP was
ﬁvefold more effective in the reduction of the neutrophil
numbers compared with soluble HYAL and achieved an 8%
higher reduction of TGF-b compared with soluble HYAL.
Discussion
These studies of the effects of HYAL-MP lung adminis-
tration revealed potentially important new ﬁndings. First, we
FIG. 3.
Soluble HYAL and HYAL-MPs induce an increase in leukocyte numbers in bronchoalveolar space. Total leukocyte
(A) and mononuclear cell (B) present in bronchoalveolar ﬂuid (BALF) recovered 96 h after intranasal inoculation of phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS), 16U of bovine testicular HYAL, 2 mg of Control-MPs, or 2 mg of HYAL-MPs. The values represent the
mean – SEM from one representative result of three independent experiments (n = 5; *p < 0.001 compared with PBS and
#p < 0.001 compared with the Control-MPs; the signiﬁcance levels were determined by ANOVA). (C) Photomicrographs of
representative healthy lung sections obtained from C57BL/6 mice 96h after intranasal inoculation of 16U HYAL, 2 mg of
Control-MPs, or 2 mg of HYAL-MPs. The tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Original magniﬁcation: 200 · ,
Scale bar: 50 mm (D) HYAL and HYAL-MPs induce an increase cells with an MSC-like phenotype. Gate 1 is a representative
image depicting the forward- and side-scatter dot plots of the cells in the BALF. The histograms overlays were performed using
the gated population (gate 1): the dotted black histogram = isotype; the red histogram = PBS; the blue histogram = soluble
HYAL; the green histogram = HYAL-MPs; and the orange histogram= Control-MPs. This ﬁgure depicts a representative
analysis from three independent experiments. Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/tea
MICROPARTICLES OF HYALURONIDASE TO TREAT PULMONARY FIBROSIS
251
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

demonstrated that HYAL-MP constitutes a feasible sys-
tem to delivery HYAL. Second, HYAL-MP recruited cells
that had phenotypic features of MSC-like cells. Third, we
demonstrated that treatment with HYAL-MP reduced more
efﬁciently than soluble HYAL the bleomycin-induced ﬁ-
brotic response in the lung parenchyma.
Our delivery system was designed to achieve lung envi-
ronment. Size is particularly important in the development
of a system for pulmonary delivery because a particle must
have a diameter of less than 10.0 mm to reach the lower
airways.26,27 The pulmonary delivery of proteins requires
that the particles for delivery be in the aerodynamic size
FIG. 4.
HYAL-MP treatment reduces alveolar leukocyte numbers numbers and collagen deposition in bleomycin-induced
ﬁbrosis. Eight days after bleomycin inoculation (4 U/kg/0.1 mL 0.9% NaCl) to lungs of C57BL/6 mice, the animals were
intranasally treated with PBS, 16 U of soluble HYAL, 2 mg of Control-MPs, or 2 mg of HYAL-MPs. Bronchoalveolar cells
were recovered 96 h after treatments, and (A) neutrophils and (B) mononuclear-cells in bleomycin-inoculated lungs were
counted. The values represent the mean – SEM (n = 5; *p < 0.05 compared with PBS and #p < 0.05 compared with soluble
HYAL; the signiﬁcance levels were determined by ANOVA). (C) The acid-soluble collagen in the supernatant of the lung
homogenates was assayed using Sircol. The values represent the mean – SEM (n = 4; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 compared with
PBS, as determined by ANOVA). (D) The area occupied by the collagen ﬁbers was determined by Picrosirius Red
morphometric analysis and digital densitometry. The data were expressed as a percentage of the total area of the ﬁeld. The
values represent the mean – SEM (n = 4; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 compared with PBS, as determined by ANOVA).
FIG. 5.
Soluble HYAL,
HYAL-MPs, and Control-
MPs did not modify cyto-
kines production in lung of
bleomycin-inoculated mice.
(A) Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-a, (B) Interleukin
(IL)-13, (C) Monocyte che-
motactic protein-1 (MCP-1),
and (D) Keratinocyte che-
moattractant (KC) were as-
sayed by ELISA. The values
represent the mean – SEM
(n = 5).
252
BITENCOURT ET AL.
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

FIG. 6.
Transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) and mRNA in lung parenchyma of bleomycin-inoculated mice intrana-
sally treated with soluble HYAL, HYAL-MPs, and Control-MPs. (A) TGF-b was assayed by ELISA. The values represent
the mean – SEM (n = 5; *p < 0.005 compared with PBS, as determined by ANOVA). The mRNA expression of (B) Tgfb1
and (C) TgfbRI was evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction. The Hprt probe was included as an endogenous
control. The gene expression values were presented as the fold change (2 - DDCt) using the relative expression in the animals
treated with PBS as a reference (dotted line). The samples were processed in duplicate, and the data were analyzed using
ANOVA (n = 5; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 compared with PBS).
FIG. 7.
HYAL-MPs reduce lung inﬂammation and collagen deposition in a bleomycin-induced lung ﬁbrosis. Photo-
micrographs of representative lung sections obtained from mice inoculated with bleomycin and intranasally (i.n.) treated with
PBS, 16U of soluble HYAL, 2 mg of Control-MPs, or 2 mg of HYAL-MPs. (A) The tissues were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin to investigate the accumulation of inﬂammatory cells (original magniﬁcation: 100 · and 200 · , scale bars: 50 and
100 mm, respectively). (B) The tissues were stained with Picrosirius Red to determine the collagen content (original magni-
ﬁcation: 100 · and 200· , scale bars: 50 and 100 mm, respectively). Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/tea
MICROPARTICLES OF HYALURONIDASE TO TREAT PULMONARY FIBROSIS
253
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

range of 1 to 5 mm to achieve deep lung deposition corre-
lated with a good clinical response for local treatment.19,21
MPs bigger than 5 mm are retained in the oropharyngeal
region through inertial collision, whereas particles between
1 and 5 mm are deposited in the bronchioles and alveoli
through gravitational sedimentation.19 This reduced size of
our MPs might therefore facilitate the development of a
pulmonary delivery system in powder form, which is sim-
pler, inexpensive, and more stable. Our results suggest that
HYAL can donate positive charge to the polymer surface;
however, this alteration does not compromise the uptake of
the particles by macrophages. Previous studies have shown
that the diffusion of hydrophilic compounds from the inner to
the outer aqueous phase reduces the drug encapsulation.18 In
our
study,
the
larger
size
of
the
therapeutic
agent
(HYAL: &55 kDa) may have reduced the agent’s diffusion
through the organic phase of the emulsion during the MP
preparation, thereby improving the HYAL encapsulation. The
preservation of enzymatic activity is also important because
the effect of soluble HYAL is partially dependent on its ac-
tivity.11 We observed that the encapsulation process did not
alter the enzymatic activity. Our data showed that HYAL-MP
constituted an adequate delivery system, preserving both
activity and release of HYAL.
Next, we analyzed whether HYAL-MP could be recog-
nized and entrapped by macrophages. Our result conﬁrms
that MPs smaller than 10 mm in diameter are efﬁciently
phagocytosed by macrophages.19,28,29 Also, using cytocha-
lasin D to the culture to bind to actin ﬁlaments and block
polymerization and the elongation of actin we demonstrated
that MP entered the macrophage via phagocytosis.
Next, we veriﬁed whether HYAL-MP could induce the
same unusual cell migration to the lung observed in a work
using soluble HYAL.11 Here, we also demonstrated the
unusual proﬁle of cellular migration induced by HYAL and
that MP-HYAL recruits mesenchymal-like cells to the lung.
Cell recruitment is one of the components of the inﬂam-
matory process that is regulated by soluble mediators re-
leased from resident cells and later from inﬂammatory cells.
Typically, neutrophils are the ﬁrst cells recruited to an in-
ﬂammatory site, and these are followed by mononuclear
cells.28 However, both soluble and encapsulated HYAL did
not induce neutrophil recruitment to the bronchoalveolar
space and lung parenchyma. Instead, the cells recruited to
the lung by either stimulus were nearly exclusively mono-
nuclear cells, in accordance with our previous results.11 It is
important to mention that these proteins are the most com-
mon surface markers used to characterize MSCs. According
to the Mesenchymal and Tissue Stem Cell Committee of the
International Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT), the pos-
itive expression of CD90.1 and CD73 is considered the
minimal criterion deﬁning MSCs.29,30 Notably, in a previous
work,11 we fully characterized the cells recruited to the
bronchoalveolar space after soluble HYAL inoculation as
MSC-like because these cells exhibited surface marker ex-
pression similar to the expression on MSCs obtained from
cord blood.31 Based on our data, we suggest that the cells
that accumulated in the BALF following HYAL-MP treat-
ment were also MSC-like.
Consistent with our previous results,11 the soluble HYAL
caused an insigniﬁcant reduction in neutrophil recruitment
following bleomycin exposure. The results presented here
show that the HYAL-MPs had the same ability to recruit
MSC-like cells to the bronchoalveolar space as soluble
HYAL, which is consistent with our previously published
data.11 Additionally, the biological activity of the HYAL-
MPs was preserved in the healthy lung. It is known that
neutrophils play an important role in the pathogenesis of IPF
and are increased in the BALF of IPF patients.32 Therefore,
the decrease in neutrophil numbers observed here may les-
sen the bleomycin-induced ﬁbrosis.
The cytokines involved in the progression of ﬁbrosis2
were also evaluated after bleomycin exposure and we did
not observe alterations in the cytokines analyzed except
TGF-b. A signiﬁcant decrease in the TGF-b concentration
was observed after HYAL-MPs treatment. Consistent with
that, we also observed a decrease in mRNA expression of
Tgfb1 in mice treated with both HYAL and HYAL-MP,
however, the gene expression of the major TGF-b receptor
TBRI was reduced in mice treated with HYAL-MP com-
pared with soluble HYAL treatment.
The TGF-b pathway is regulated in a positive feedback
loop, in which TGF-b is required to increase the level of its
own mRNA and the mRNA of the TGF-b receptor.33,34 Thus,
the decreased gene expression and production of TGF-b can
be the responsible for the decrease expression of its receptor
TBRI. In a bleomycin-treatment model using the soluble
TGF-b receptor as a therapeutic strategy, it was demonstrated
that this molecule possesses antiﬁbrotic potential in vivo and
thus constitutes an effective treatment for ﬁbrosis.35 Ad-
ditionally, TGF-b has been observed to play a role in the
development of ﬁbrosis, possibly as the main switch that
triggers disease progression.36 This cytokine, which is pro-
duced by alveolar epithelial cells, also drives the differentia-
tion of ﬁbroblasts into myoﬁbroblasts that secrete excessive
amounts of collagen.3 A therapeutic approach that decreases
TGF-b levels could therefore ameliorate ﬁbrosis. In light of
these previous ﬁndings, our intranasally delivered HYAL-MPs
constitute a feasible strategy for the treatment of lung ﬁbrosis.
As described previously,1,11 a histopathological analysis
of the lungs of the mice inoculated with bleomycin and
treated with sterile PBS revealed subpleural and parenchy-
mal foci of inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis. Our data demon-
strated that both HYAL and HYAL-MP are able to reduce
ﬁbrosis. However, although the effects of the soluble HYAL
and HYAL-MPs appear comparable, there were important
differences between the treatments that indicate that the
HYAL-MPs are clearly more effective than the soluble
HYAL. Pulmonary ﬁbrosis and other conditions have been
investigated as potential targets for MSC therapy because
MSCs can differentiate into diverse lung cells.37 A review of
our current understanding of the role of stem and progenitor
cells in lung repair encourages cell-based and novel bioen-
gineering approaches as therapeutic strategies to repair and
remodel the lung after injury.30 Cell-based therapy has
typically been an important means of ameliorating ﬁbrosis,
as in a study using umbilical cord MSCs that diminished
bleomycin-induced ﬁbrosis.38 The disadvantages of this
therapy are related to the fact that classical stem cell therapy
can increase the risk of allergic reactions and bacterial and
viral infections.39,40 Moreover, the high numbers of cells
that must be transplanted are difﬁcult to obtain, and there
are no standardized methods for collecting these cells.41 In
this study, using MPs loaded with HYAL, we present an
254
BITENCOURT ET AL.
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

innovative, alternative approach for the treatment of ﬁbrosis.
In this therapy, the encapsulated enzyme appears to reduce
ﬁbrosis. Based on our data, we suggest that this reduction
in the lung ﬁbrosis by HYAL occurs due to three distinct
events: (i) fractionation of the lung hyaluronan, which
generates different fragments that regulate inﬂammation,10
(ii) decreased TGF-b production and collagen deposition,
and (iii) increased numbers of MSC-like cells in the lung.11
In summary, we have demonstrated that both soluble
HYAL and HYAL-MPs decrease lung ﬁbrosis and that
HYAL-MPs are more efﬁcient than soluble HYAL and thus
constitute a novel, alternative strategy for the amelioration
of pulmonary ﬁbrosis.
Conclusions
Encapsulation in PLGA, preserve the biological activity
of HYAL and the HYAL-MPS are appropriate for intranasal
administration route since they exhibit an adequate size, zeta
potential, and release rate. The effects of the HYAL-MPs
were similar to the effects of the soluble HYAL: both recruit
mononuclear cells with MSC-like phenotypes into the
healthy lung. Moreover, in lungs with bleomycin-induced
ﬁbrosis, the HYAL-MPs were more effective than the sol-
uble HYAL in decreasing inﬂammation, TGF-b production,
and collagen deposition. We propose that HYAL-MP
administration is a novel strategy for the treatment of pul-
monary ﬁbrosis.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge J.O.D. Ciampo,
F.R. Moraes, K.C.F. Bordon, and E.M. Floriano for the tech-
nical assistance. These studies were funded by the Fundac¸a˜o
de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sa˜o Paulo (FAPESP)
and the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı´ﬁco e
Tecnolo´gico (CNPq).
Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
References
1. Mouratis, M.A., and Aidinis, V. Modeling pulmonary ﬁ-
brosis with bleomycin. Curr Opin Pulm Med 17, 355, 2011.
2. Hardie, W.D., Glasser, S.W., and Hagood, J.S. Emerging
concepts in the pathogenesis of lung ﬁbrosis. Am J Pathol
175, 3, 2009.
3. King, T.E., Jr., Pardo, A., and Selman, M. Idiopathic pul-
monary ﬁbrosis. Lancet 378, 1949, 2011.
4. Raghu, G., Weycker, D., Edelsberg, J., Bradford, W.Z., and
Oster, G. Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic pulmonary
ﬁbrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 174, 810, 2006.
5. O’Connell, O.J., Kennedy, M.P., and Henry, M.T. Idio-
pathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis: treatment update. Adv Ther 28,
986, 2011.
6. Menzel, E.J., and Farr, C. Hyaluronidase and its substrate
hyaluronan: biochemistry, biological activities and thera-
peutic uses. Cancer Lett 131, 3, 1998.
7. Dunn, A.L., Heavner, J.E., Racz, G., and Day, M. Hya-
luronidase: a review of approved formulations, indications
and off-label use in chronic pain management. Expert Opin
Biol Ther 10, 127, 2010.
8. Kemparaju, K., and Girish, K.S. Snake venom hyaluron-
idase: a therapeutic target. Cell Biochem Funct 24, 7,
2006.
9. Hynes, W.L., Dixon, A.R., Walton, S.L., and Aridgides,
L.J. The extracellular hyaluronidase gene (hylA) of Strep-
tococcus pyogenes. FEMS Microbiol Lett 184, 109, 2000.
10. Jiang, D., Liang, J., and Noble, P.W. Hyaluronan in tissue
injury and repair. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 23, 435, 2007.
11. Bitencourt, C.S., Pereira, P.A., Ramos, S.G., Sampaio,
S.V., Arantes, E.C., Aronoff, D.M., and Faccioli, L.H.
Hyaluronidase recruits mesenchymal-like cells to the lung
and ameliorates ﬁbrosis. Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair 4, 3,
2011.
12. Girish, K.S., and Kemparaju, K. The magic glue hyalur-
onan and its eraser hyaluronidase: a biological overview.
Life Sci 80, 1921, 2007.
13. Mundargi, R.C., Babu, V.R., Rangaswamy, V., Patel, P.,
and
Aminabhavi,
T.M.
Nano/micro
technologies
for
delivering macromolecular therapeutics using poly(D,L-
lactide-co-glycolide) and its derivatives. J Control Release
125, 193, 2008.
14. Allen, T.M., and Cullis, P.R. Drug delivery systems: en-
tering the mainstream. Science 303, 1818, 2004.
15. Nicolete, R., Lima Kde, M., Ju´nior, J.M., Barufﬁ, M.D., de
Medeiros, A.I., Bentley, M.V., Silva, C.L., and Faccioli,
L.H. In vitro and in vivo activities of leukotriene B4-loaded
biodegradable microspheres. Prostaglandins Other Lipid
Mediat 83, 121, 2007.
16. Wischke, C., and Schwendeman, S.P. Principles of encap-
sulating hydrophobic drugs in PLA/PLGA microparticles.
Int J Pharm 364, 298, 2008.
17. Dos Santos, D.F., Bitencourt, C.S., Gelfuso, G.M., Pereira,
P.A., de Souza, P.R., Sorgi, C.A., Nicolete, R., and Fac-
cioli, L.H. Biodegradable microspheres containing leuko-
triene B(4) and cell-free antigens from Histoplasma
capsulatum activate murine bone marrow-derived macro-
phages. Eur J Pharm Sci 44, 580, 2011.
18. dos Santos, D.F., Nicolete, R., de Souza, P.R., Bitencourt
Cda, S., dos Santos, R.R., Jr., Bonato, V.L., Silva, C.L., and
Faccioli, L.H. Characterization and in vitro activities of
cell-free antigens from Histoplasma capsulatum-loaded
biodegradable microspheres. Eur J Pharm Sci 38, 548,
2009.
19. Shoyele, S.A. Engineering protein particles for pulmonary
drug delivery. Methods Mol Biol 437, 149, 2008.
20. Shoyele, S.A., and Cawthorne, S. Particle engineering
techniques for inhaled biopharmaceuticals. Adv Drug Deliv
Rev 58, 1009, 2006.
21. Chow, A.H., Tong, H.H., Chattopadhyay, P., and Sheku-
nov, B.Y. Particle engineering for pulmonary drug delivery.
Pharm Res 24, 411, 2007.
22. Bordon, K.C., Perino, M.G., Giglio, J.R., and Arantes, E.C.
Isolation, enzymatic characterization and antiedematogenic
activity of the ﬁrst reported rattlesnake hyaluronidase
from Crotalus durissus terriﬁcus venom. Biochimie 94,
2740, 2012.
23. Ortiz, L.A., Gambelli, F., McBride, C., Gaupp, D., Baddoo,
M., Kaminski, N., and Phinney, D.G. Mesenchymal stem
cell engraftment in lung is enhanced in response to bleo-
mycin exposure and ameliorates its ﬁbrotic effects. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 100, 8407, 2003.
24. Hecker, L., Vittal, R., Jones, T., Jagirdar, R., Luckhardt,
T.R., Horowitz, J.C., Pennathur, S., Martinez, F.J., and
Thannickal, V.J. NADPH oxidase-4 mediates myoﬁbroblast
MICROPARTICLES OF HYALURONIDASE TO TREAT PULMONARY FIBROSIS
255
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.

activation and ﬁbrogenic responses to lung injury. Nat Med
15, 1077, 2009.
25. Padua, A.I., Silva, C.L., Ramos, S.G., Faccioli, L.H., and
Martinez, J.A. Inﬂuence of a DNA-hsp65 vaccine on bleo-
mycin-induced lung injury. J Bras Pneumol 34, 891, 2008.
26. Tabata, Y., and Ikada, Y. Effect of the size and surface
charge of polymer microspheres on their phagocytosis by
macrophage. Biomaterials 9, 356, 1988.
27. Champion, J.A., Walker, A., and Mitragotri, S. Role of
particle size in phagocytosis of polymeric microspheres.
Pharm Res 25, 1815, 2008.
28. Lawrence, T., Willoughby, D.A., and Gilroy, D.W. Anti-
inﬂammatory lipid mediators and insights into the resolu-
tion of inﬂammation. Nat Rev Immunol 2, 787, 2002.
29. Dominici, M., Le Blanc, K., Mueller, I., Slaper-Cortenbach,
I., Marini, F., Krause, D., Deans, R., Keating, A., Prockop,
D.J., and Horwitz, E. Minimal criteria for deﬁning multi-
potent mesenchymal stromal cells. The International So-
ciety for Cellular Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy
8, 315, 2006.
30. Weiss, D.J., Bertoncello, I., Borok, Z., Kim, C., Panoskaltsis-
Mortari, A., Reynolds, S., Rojas, M., Stripp, B., Warburton,
D., and Prockop, D.J. Stem cells and cell therapies in lung
biology and lung diseases. Proc Am Thorac Soc 8, 223,
2011.
31. Wang, X., Hisha, H., Taketani, S., Adachi, Y., Li, Q., Cui,
W., Cui, Y., Wang, J., Song, C., Mizokami, T., Okazaki, S.,
Li, Q., Fan, T., Fan, H., Lian, Z., Gershwin, M.E., and Ike-
hara, S. Characterization of mesenchymal stem cells isolated
from mouse fetal bone marrow. Stem Cells 24, 482, 2006.
32. Obayashi, Y., Yamadori, I., Fujita, J., Yoshinouchi, T.,
Ueda, N., and Takahara, J. The role of neutrophils in the
pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Chest 112,
1338, 1997.
33. Kim, S.J., Angel, P., Lafyatis, R., Hattori, K., Kim, K.Y.,
Sporn, M.B., Karin, M., and Roberts, A.B. Autoinduction
of transforming growth factor beta 1 is mediated by the AP-
1 complex. Mol Cell Biol 10, 1492, 1990.
34. de Figueiredo-Pontes, L.L., Assis, P.A., Santana-Lemos,
B.A., Ja´como, R.H., Lima, A.S., Garcia, A.B., Thome´,
C.H., Arau´jo, A.G., Panepucci, R.A., Zago, M.A., Nagler,
A., Falca˜o, R.P., and Rego, E.M. Halofuginone has anti-
proliferative effects in acute promyelocytic leukemia by
modulating the transforming growth factor beta signaling
pathway. PLoS One 6, e26713, 2011.
35. Wang, Q., Wang, Y., Hyde, D.M., Gotwals, P.J., Kote-
liansky, V.E., Ryan, S.T., and Giri, S.N. Reduction of
bleomycin induced lung ﬁbrosis by transforming growth
factor beta soluble receptor in hamsters. Thorax 54,
805, 1999.
36. Grande, N.R., Pea˜o, M.N.D., de Sa´, C.M., and A´ guas, A.P.
Lung ﬁbrosis induced by bleomycin: structural changes and
overview of recent advances. Scanning Microsc 12, 487,
1998.
37. Siniscalco, D., Sullo, N., Maione, S., Rossi, F., and
D’Agostino, B. Stem cell therapy: the great promise in lung
disease. Ther Adv Respir Dis 2, 173, 2008.
38. Moodley, Y., Atienza, D., Manuelpillai, U., Samuel, C.S.,
Tchongue, J., Ilancheran, S., Boyd, R., and Trounson, A.
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells reduce ﬁ-
brosis of bleomycin-induced lung injury. Am J Pathol 175,
303, 2009.
39. Benjamin, D.K., Jr., Miller, W.C., Bayliff, S., Martel, L.,
Alexander, K.A., and Martin, P.L. Infections diagnosed in
the ﬁrst year after pediatric stem cell transplantation. Pe-
diatr Infect Dis J 21, 227, 2002.
40. Engelhard, D., Cordonnier, C., Shaw, P.J., Parkalli, T.,
Guenther, C., Martino, R., Dekker, A.W., Prentice, H.G.,
Gustavsson, A., Nurnberger, W., and Ljungman, P. Early
and late invasive pneumococcal infection following stem
cell transplantation: a European Bone Marrow Transplan-
tation survey. Br J Haematol 117, 444, 2002.
41. Garcı´a-Castro, J., Trigueros, C., Madrenas, J., Pe´rez-
Simo´n, J.A., Rodriguez, R., and Menendez, P. Mesenchy-
mal stem cells and their use as cell replacement therapy and
disease modelling tool. J Cell Mol Med 12, 2552, 2008.
Address correspondence to:
Lu´cia Helena Faccioli, PhD
Departamento de Ana´lises Clı´nicas
Toxicolo´gicas e Bromatolo´gicas
Faculdade de Cieˆncias Farmaceˆuticas de Ribeira˜o Preto
Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo
Avenida do Cafe´
S/N–Monte Alegre
Ribeira˜o Preto
SP 14040-903
Brazil
E-mail: faccioli@fcfrp.usp.br
Received: July 2, 2013
Accepted: July 15, 2014
Online Publication Date: December 23, 2014
256
BITENCOURT ET AL.
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND PACKAGE from www.liebertpub.com at 10/21/25. For personal use only.