JABFM
Journal of Applied
Biomaterials &
Functional
Materials
https://doi.org/10.1177/2280800020977170
Journal of Applied Biomaterials &
Functional Materials
﻿1­–8
© The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/2280800020977170
journals.sagepub.com/home/jbf
Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial use,
reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and
Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
Introduction
A large number of human populations suffer from brain
injuries which effect physical as well as emotional senti-
ments of patients and their relatives.1 In order to cure
these injuries, the options of diagnosis and therapy are
limited due to complex brain structure and blood brain
barrier (BBB). Hence this remains a challenging situation
for physicians and researchers especially after traumatic
or ischemic brain injuries. Glioblastoma is the tumor
causing severe damage to the brain resulting in almost 1
year survival of the patient.2 The characteristics of glio-
blastoma includes poor prognosis and present treatment
including has radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery
does not improve the situation.3 The residual cells after
the glioblastoma treatment, including surgery, invades
parenchyma making it difficult to completely eradicate
glioblastoma and results in recurrence.4 The BBB is a pre-
ventive barrier consists of proteins junction at endothelial
cells of brain, which mainly involved in prevention of
blood component transport containing drugs into central
nervous system (CNS).5 Neurovascular unit (NVU) con-
sist of glial cells, neurons and endothelial cells.6 BBB is a
component of this extensive network. Any disturbance of
Intranasal delivery of Paclitaxel
encapsulated nanoparticles for brain
injury due to Glioblastoma
Ying Zhang1, Chao Sun2, Qingtao Zhang2, Yongbing Deng2,
Xi Hu2 and Peng Chen2
Abstract
Brain injury is a common cause for physical and emotional effects to the large number of populations. Moreover,
glioblastoma is the tumor in brain with no possible treatment leading to death. The blood–brain barrier’s makes the
treatment more difficult by preventing the drugs to reach central nervous system. Paclitaxel (PTX) encapsulated Poly
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles (NPs), PTX-PLGA-NPs were developed using emulsification method. The
PTX-PLGA-NPs were characterized using Malvern Zetasizer and Scanning Electron Microscopy and were evaluated
for their cytotoxicity in U87MG cells. PTX-PLGA-NPs were prepared using single emulsion method having size of 154
± 22.19 nm with zeta potential of –23.7 mV. The PTX-PLGA-NPs were spherical in shape and have dose dependent
cytotoxicity on U87MG cells. The PTX was released from the particles with initial burst release followed by sustained
release pattern. The biodistribution was studied in mice with glioblastoma model using 125I radiolabeled PTX-PLGA-NPs
and anti-glioblastoma was studied with PTX-PLGA-NPs. The biodistribution studies revealed PTX-PLGA-NPs after
intranasal administration resulted in higher in vivo uptake with high anti-glioblastoma efficacy. The results suggest that
PTX-PLGA-NPs administered through intranasal route have potential in the treatment of glioblastoma.
Keywords
Intranasal delivery, paclitaxel, nanoparticles, brain injury, glioblastoma
Date received: 19 July 2020; revised: 26 October 2020; accepted: 6 November 2020
1Department of Pharmacy, Chongqing Emergency Medical Center,
Chongqing University Central Hospital, Chongqing, China
2Department of Neurosurgery, Chongqing Emergency Medical Center,
Chongqing University Central Hospital, Chongqing, China
Corresponding author:
Peng Chen, Department of Neurosurgery, Chongqing Emergency
Medical Center, NO 1 Jiankang road, yuzhong district, Chongqing
400014, China.
Email: chenpengpph@163.com
977170 JBF0010.1177/2280800020977170Journal of Applied Biomaterials & Functional MaterialsZhang et al.
research-article2020
Original Research Article

2
Journal of Applied Biomaterials & Functional Materials 00(0)
NVU due to primary or secondary injury may disturb the
BBB.7 Further on the disturbance of BBB accelerate there
is a development of neurodegeneration via reduction of
amyloid-β clearance and also neurotoxic molecules
leakage.8
Paclitaxel (PTX) is the drug which is used as one of
the most common chemotherapeutic agents to treat wide
range of cancer including lung and breast. However,
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) mediated efflux reduces the PTX
absorption in the tumor cells.9,10 Nanoparticles (NP) are
ideal vehicle for administration of drugs into the brain by
crossing biological barriers.11 The NPs encapsulated drug
is one of the effect approaches to enhance bioavailability,
site-specific delivery and minimize deleterious effects of
therapeutic drugs.12 Here we utilize Poly (lactic-cogly-
colic acid) (PLGA) copolymer for NPs synthesis. PLGA,
being a FDA approved polymer with its wide use in
encapsulating and delivering of hydrophobic drugs
including PTX offers the high internalization of drug in
the tumor cells owing to the phagocytosis or endocytosis
mechanism.13 They have excellent biodegradability and
biocompatibility.14 The poor permeability of NPs in the
BBB hinders the delivery of NPs in central nervous sys-
tem and is challenging situation. The previous studies
focused on direct drug delivery into brain tissue or cere-
brospinal fluid reservoirs.15
In last decades intranasal (IN) drug delivery has gained
major interest in research by scientists and physicians in
clinics.16 The nasal path epitomizes a non-invasive admin-
istration of effective pharmaceutical elements for CNS
systemic action.17 Due to the fact that epithelium of nasal
cavity is a big barrier, the tightness of junction mucosa of
nasal route is low mainly due to leaky nature of epithelial
tissue. Although the mucosa is extensively vascularized
but leaky epithelium and lamina propri provide an excel-
lent surface area for drug administration.18
The absorption of molecules directly through olfactory
pathways via nasal cavity enhances the performance of
pharmacokinetic due to direct entrance in the brain.19 The
active pharmaceutical elements absorbed in the large sur-
face area of nasal mucosa, which provide local and sys-
temic effect and can be administrated to target the brain
directly. The drug administration by nasal pathway is
advantageous over intravenous and oral administration,
because the nasal route is self-administration, non-inva-
siveness, shortest duration to onset of effect and enhanced
bioavailability due to absence of hepatic metabolism.19,20
Moreover, crossing the BBB may potentially enhanced
central nervous system (CNS) availability of the therapeu-
tic drug.
Keeping in mind the above-mentioned studies, we
design a protocol and develop PTX-loaded PLGA nano-
particles for the IN administration. The design of delivery
system and its mechanism is presented as Figure 1.
Materials and methods
Materials
PLGA having molecular weight of ~ 30,000 was pur-
chased from Shandong Institute of Medical Instrument,
Shandong, China). PTX was obtained from Hefei Bo Mei
Biotechnology Co., Ltd. China. Penicillin-streptomycin
solution, Roswell Park Memorials Institute (RPMI)-1640
medium, Trypsin-EDTA solution and Fetal bovine serum
(FBS) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, USA. [3–(4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bro-
mide] cell viability/cytotoxicity assay kit (MTT) was
Figure 1.  The schematic representation of particle administered via intranasal route for brain injury.

Zhang et al.
3
obtained from Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China). Triple
distilled water from Milli-Q Plus System (Millipore
Corporation, Bedford, USA) was used.
Methods
Synthesis of PLGA- PTX nanoparticles.  In order to encapsu-
late hydrophobic compound PTX in PLGA, single emul-
sion –solvent evaporation method was used to prepare
PTX laden PLGA-NPs.21 Briefly, in 2 mL of ethyl acetate,
200 mg of PLGA was dissolved along with 20 mg PTX and
kept for 30 min under stirring. Aqueous solution of 5% w/v
of PVA (4 mL) act as surfactant and NPs mixture was
added drop wise at intermittent vortex. Following the com-
plete mixing of PLGA- PTX, it is sonicated for another
1 min to form clear emulsion. The mixture is added in
0.3% w/v aqueous solution of PVA (100 mL) followed by
3 h magnetic stirring. The PVA stabilized the emulsion and
formed uniformed size particles. The pure NPs obtained
after centrifugation at speed of 6000 rpm for 20 min and
washed with ultrapure water three times. The collected
pure particles are freeze dried and placed in freezer for fur-
ther studies. The synthesis parameters were optimized by
repeating the steps involved in fabrication process. The
dispersion of NPs in water was analyzed at an equivalent
concentration of PTX (10mg/mL).
Physiochemical properties of the nanoparticles and PTX Con-
tent.  PTX laden PLGA-NPs were dispersed in Milli Q
water for analyzing their physiochemical properties. The
PTX laden PLGA-NPs size of and morphology were char-
acterized using Malvern zetasizer and electron micros-
copy. The surface charge of PTX laden PLGA-NPs was
also analyzed using the Zetasizer of Malvern Instruments.
The surface morphology was studied using Scanning Elec-
tron Microscopy (SEM).
The pure freeze dried 5 mg NPs was thoroughly dis-
solved in DCM (1 mL). To extract PTX from NPs, 3 mL of
water is added. The organic phase is evaporated under con-
tinuous stirring at 1500 rpm for 1 h at room temperature.
To get rid of polymer residue, aqueous solution is filtered.
The spectroscopic analysis was performed at 273 nm to
calculate the content of PTX in NPs. The drug loading is
calculated as content of PTX that is, expressed in milli-
gram/100 mg of NPs and encapsulation efficiency was
evaluated as drug encapsulated percentage to the initially
added drug during preparation.
Entrapment efficiency (%) = weight of PTX in PTX-
PLGA-NPs /weight of PTX initially taken × 100
Loading efficiency (%) = weight of PTX in PTX-
PLGA/ weight of PTX × 100
In Vitro drug release analysis.  The in vitro studies of PTX
release from NPs were performed by using membrane
diffusion method. 60 mg of purified drug loaded NPs was
suspended in 1mL of water and carefully placed in 60 kDa
dialysis bag. These designed dialysis bag loaded with for-
mulation is permeable to PTX but prevent NPs release and
suspended in 25 mL (pH 7.4). The mixture is gently shaken
with help of magnetic stirrer at speed of 100 rpm. After set
time interval 2.5 mL of sample is withdrawn from receiv-
ing phase and replaced by fresh medium in order to avoid
sink condition. The collected sample was carefully ana-
lyzed by spectroscopic method at 273 nm, in order to find
the drug content in the sample. The release experiments
were performed trice and mean value is calculated.
Cytotoxicity studies.  The toxicity and permeability of fabri-
cated PTX-PLGA-NPs were studied on U87MG, human
glioblastoma cells. Eagle’s minimal essential medium with
10% foetal bovine serum was used to grow cells. The
effect and toxicity of PTX-PLGA-NPs along with free
PTX and blank NPs was studied by 3-(4,5-dimethyltiazol-
2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay
method. The cells were treated at an equivalent concentra-
tion of PTX (0.01 µM, 0.1 µM, 0.5 µM, and 1 µM) for 24 h
followed by addition of MTT solution (0.5 mg/mL). The
cells were incubated for additional 4 h and the insoluble
formazan crystals were dissolved by adding 100 µL of
DMSO. The optical density of the plate was measured at
570 nm using ELISA plate reader.
In vitro permeability of PTX.  A vertical Franz-diffusion
cell system was used to study in vitro permeability. Donor
phase consist of 5 mg/mL of PTX, that was placed on
synthetic membrane. The membrane was impregnated in
isopropyl myristate, 1.8 cm2 of membrane area was
involved in effective diffusion. The PBS is applied as
acceptor phase. The stirring was adjusted at 100 RPM
speed. At set time period 0.8 mL of sample is collected
from acceptor phase and replaced by fresh medium.
Spectroscopic analysis was used to calculate the concen-
tration of PTX.
Cell uptake studies.  U87MG cells were employed for the
cell uptake studies for PTX-PLGA-NPs. Firstly, the 1 ×
105 cells were seeded in a glass bottom dish and incubated
in an incubator for 24 h at 37°C. Subsequently, the cells
were treated with Nile red tagged PTX-PLGA-NPs and
free Nile red for 6 h. Afterwards, the cells were washed
with PBS and the nucleus was stained with DAPI (0.5 μg/
mL). The cells were imaged by a confocal microscope
after several washings with PBS.
In-vivo studies.  We performed the animal studies after the
approval of local ethical committee of Chongqing Emer-
gency Medical Center under the protocol number:
CEMC/185-0/2019. The animals were treated according to
the protocol provided by the local ethical committee.

4
Journal of Applied Biomaterials & Functional Materials 00(0)
Bio-distribution test of PTX-PLGA-NPs.  The biodistribution
studies of PTX-PLGA-NPs was evaluated by radiolabel-
ling it with 125I by the Iodogen. The unloaded residues
were removed using size exclusion chromatography.
The male mice (Balb/c) were numbed with 5% chloral
hydrate and placed on a stereotaxic apparatus. U87MG
cells (1 × 106 cells/5 ml) were used to established glioblas-
toma model. The cells were injected into right brain of the
mice and monitored under standard condition for 7 days.
The treatment was started as the size of brain tumor reaches
0.4–0.6 cm in diameter.
The 125I labeled PTX-PLGA-NPs was administered via
IN route and also injected via tail vein into tumor bearing
mice at concentration of ∼35 μCi per mouse. The mice
were sacrificed after 2 h and 24 h post injection. The
injected dose per gram was counted in organs and blood
with the help of gamma counter. These experiments were
repeated thrice and final data was presented as mean ±
standard deviation (SD).
Anti-glioblastoma study.  The tumor model was stabled by
using above protocol. The studies were started when the
tumor volume reached approximately 70–100 mm3. The
mice were randomly distributed in 3 groups (n = 6) and
administered with 10 mg/kg body weight dose of PTX in
PTX-PLGA-NPs via IN route and by intravenous adminis-
tration, and PBS via tail vein injection. The dose (7.5 mg/
kg body weight) was injected of day 1 and day 7. The
tumor volume was monitored for 12 days and the mice
were sacrificed at the end of the study.
Statistical analysis
The significance difference in the results were measures
using Statistical analysis software Prism 5.0. Differences
among the groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA
and the p < 0.05 was set as level of significance.
Result and discussion
Synthesis and characterization of PLGA- PTX
nanoparticles
We have successfully used single emulsion method for the
development of PTX-PLGA-NPs.22 We have used PLGA
to prepare the NPs as its offers various advantages over
other polymers. PLGA is biocompatible and has been
approved by US-FDA also it is used clinically. The process
was optimized to obtain the homogenous NPs with maxi-
mum encapsulation efficiency. The size of PTX-PLGA-
NPs was found to be 154 ± 22.19 nm as measured using
Malvern Zetasizer and SEM. The size and surface mor-
phology of the particles were further confirmed by using
SEM, which revealed the smooth surface and homogeneity
of the particles. Figure 2 shows the size measured by DLS
and surface morphology of the particles observed through
SEM. The surface charge on the particles was found to be
–23.7 ± 2.71 mV as measured by Malvern zetasizer. The
encapsulation efficiency of PTX laden PLGA-NPs were
found to be 79.41%, however the loading efficiency was
found to be 6.48 %. The results of physicochemical char-
acterization have been illustrated in Table 1.
In vitro release of PTX from NPs
The in-vitro release study was carried out for 24 h using a
dialysis bag method. The results revealed that the free PTX
could be released from the dialysis membrane at much
higher rate than compare to the PTX loaded in PTX-
PLGA-NPs. However, initial burst release was observed
from the PTX-PLGA-NPs which might be attributed to the
PTX present at the surface of NPs. However, the PTX
firmly associated with the NPs showed a sustain release
pattern. The ability of PLGA to sustain the release of the
drug improve the therapeutic effect of anticancer agents
Figure 2.  The DLS size of PTX-PLGA-NPs and SEM image of PTX-PLGA-NPs.

Zhang et al.
5
and minimize the side effect. Also, the thickness of PLGA
could determine the release kinetics.
The diffusion of free PTX revealed the contrary results
and was released within 8 h of the experiment, whereas
only 53% of PTX was release from PTX-PLGA-NPs at the
particular time. However, complete release was obtained
after 72 h. The results have been illustrated in Figure 3.
In vitro cytotoxic
The cytotoxic effect of the developed PTX-PLGA-NPs
was evaluated in U87MG cells.23 The cells were treated
with free PTX and PTX-PLGA-NPs at equivalent concen-
tration and the cytotoxicity was measured. The results of
cytotoxicity were compared with free PTX and untreated
cell designated as control. The results revealed that the free
PTX and PTX-PLGA-NPs cause dose dependent cytotox-
icity to the cells as compared to the control. However,
PTX-PLGA-NPs causes significantly high cytotoxicity to
the cells in comparison to free PTX. PTX triggers apopto-
sis and it acts by stabilizing the microtubules at the time of
disassembling of chromosomes and inhibits the progres-
sion of mitosis. The PLGA-NPs alone does not cause any
cytotoxicity and were nontoxic to the cells, revealing their
biocompatibility as illustrated in Figure 4.
In vitro permeability assay
The Franz cell diffusion system was used to analyze the
PTX diffused from PTX-PLGA-NPs and the diffusion was
compared with free PTX.24 The diffusion study was car-
ried out for 12 h. As shown in Figure 5 it was clearly
observed that the diffusion of PTX-PLGA-NPs through
the synthetic membrane was higher at all-time points. On
the contrary, the diffusion of free PTX was slower in com-
parison to PTX-PLGA-NPs.
Cellular uptake
The cellular uptake studies conducted on U87MG cells
revealed that the Nile red tagged PTX-PLGA-NPs could
be engulfed by the cells significantly more than plain Nile
red.25 The results obtained after 4 h of incubation of Nile
red tagged PTX-PLGA-NPs and plain Nile red has been
represented in Figure 6. The higher uptake of PTX-PLGA-
NPs was clearly observed as high fluorescence in the cells
around the DAPI stained nucleus. The results might be
attributed to the higher engulfment of PTX-PLGA-NPs in
comparison to plain Nile red by means of endocytosis.
Bio-distribution assay
The tissue distribution analysis for U87MG glioblastoma
tumor mice model has been summarized in Figure 7. The
results illustrated the comparison of PTX-PLGA-NPs
injected through IV and the PTX-PLGA-NPs administered
via IN route. The NPs administered through IV resulted in a
high concentration in blood at the initial 2 h, which decreases
Table 1.  Physiochemical characterization of PTX-PLGA-NPs.
Formulation
Size (nm)
PDI
Zeta potential
(mV)
Entrapment
efficiency (%)
Loading
efficiency (%)
PTX-PLGA-NPs
154 ± 22.19
0.232
–23.7 ± 2.71
79.41
6.48
Figure 3.  The percentage cumulative release of PTX-PLGA-
NPs at pH 7.4 and 37°C.
Figure 4.  The percentage cell viability of PTX-PLGA-NPs
after 24 h of incubation with the cells.
**p < 0.01 PTX-PLGA-NPs versus free PTX group, *p < 0.001 PTX-
PLGA-NPs versus free PTX group and #p < 0.05 PTX-PLGA-NPs
versus free PTX respectively.

6
Journal of Applied Biomaterials & Functional Materials 00(0)
significantly at 24 with the distribution in organs with lim-
ited amount present in tumor. The PTX has a short half-life
when administered systemically. Therefore, high dose of
PTX is required during systemic treatment, which results in
high accumulation of drug in non-targeted organs and severe
toxicity. However, the NPs administered through IN route
allowed the higher uptake of NPs in tumor of the brain. Also
a significant decrease in ID%/g value from 1.50 ± 0.078 to
0.45 ± 0.078 were observed which indicated in vivo uptake
of U87MG.26
The ID%/g of blood sample of both PTX-PLGA-NPs
after IV and IN administration indicated a decrease in
value from 2 h to 24 h. However, the radioactivity of tumor
tissue didn’t indicate any significant decrease. The ratio of
ID%/g value between blood and tumor increased for 24 h
Figure 5.  The percentage amount of PTX diffused from PTX-
PLGA-NPs and free PTX.
Figure 6.  U87MG cell uptake of 100 μg/mL Nile red-loaded PLGA-NPs and free Nile red.
Figure 7.  Bio-distribution of PTX-PLGA-NPs radiolabeled with 125I in mice with tumors: (a) PTX-PLGA-NPs administered through
IN and (b) PTX-PLGA-NPs administered through IV.

Zhang et al.
7
while the ratio of intravenously injected PTX-PLGA-NPs
decreased then PTX-PLGA-NPs administered IN. The
finding proved a higher accumulation PTX-PLGA-NPs
into the tumor, which might be due to enhanced permeabil-
ity of PTX via IN administration.
Antitumor effect
The studies confirmed that IN delivery of PTX-PLGA-
NPs revealed excellent glioblastoma growth inhibition as
compared to control group and IV administered PTX-
PLGA-NPs.27 As shown in Figure 8, PTX-PLGA-NPs
administrated IN indicated strongest anti-glioblastoma
efficacy as compared to other groups, this might be due to
neovasculature and U87MG glioblastoma cells specific
delivery of PTX. The size of tumor after the treatment with
PTX-PLGA-NPs (IN administered) revealed significant
decrease p < 0.001 and p < 0.05 in comparison with PBS
group and PTX-PLGA-NPs (IV administered) respec-
tively). The results might also be attributed to the restricted
penetration of the drugs in the brain, when administered
systemically due to the presence of BBB. To achieve the
desirable concentration of the drug in the malignant tumor
of the brain, high systemic dose would be required, which
could result in severe cytotoxicity of the non-targeted
organs. The use of targeting agent might facilitate the pen-
etration of the drug in brain tumor. However, the alterna-
tive route of administration, IN could minimize the
systemic toxicity, while significantly improving the drug
delivery to the brain. The delivery through IN bypass the
BBB and results in better accumulation of drug in brain
and inhibition of tumor. The PTX-PLGA-NPs adminis-
tered via IV was less effective than IN PTX-PLGA-NPs
which might be because of the presence of BBB.
Conclusion
The study focuses on the treatment efficacy of PTX-
PLGA-NPs administered by IN in brain injury caused by
the tumor. We have developed homogeneously distributed
spherical PTX-PLGA-NPs using single emulsion method.
The non-toxic PTX-PLGA-NPs were capable of releasing
the drug in sustain manner. The IN delivery of PTX-
PLGA-NPs revealed enhanced delivery of drug in tumor,
when compared to IV delivered PTX-PLGA-NPs in which
the concentration of the drug was significantly high in
non-targeted organs and have limited drug penetration in
CNS. The IN delivery of PTX-PLGA-NPs significantly
inhibit the glioblastoma as it overcomes the limitation of
systemic administration, which is hindered via BBB. We
conclude that the IN delivery of the PTX-PLGA-NPs have
significant potential in inhibition of brain tumor.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article:
The study was supported by the Foundation of the Program of
Technology of Education Committee of Chongqing (No.
KJQN201800122) and the Program of Technology of Science
and Technology Committee of Yuzhong District in Chongqing
(No. 20180131).
ORCID iD
Peng Chen
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8397-4294
References
	 1.	 Stocchetti N and Zanier ER. Chronic impact of traumatic
brain injury on outcome and quality of life: a narrative
review. Crit Care 2016; 20: 148.
	 2.	 Ramalho MJ, Sevin E, Gosselet F, et al. Receptor-mediated
PLGA nanoparticles for glioblastoma multiforme treatment.
Int J Pharm 2018; 545: 84–92.
	 3.	 de Robles P, Fiest KM, Frolkis AD, et al. The worldwide
incidence and prevalence of primary brain tumors: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Neuro Oncol 2015; 17:
776–783.
	 4.	 Lara-Velazquez M, Al-Kharboosh R, Jeanneret S, et  al.
Advances in brain tumor surgery for glioblastoma in adults.
Brain Sci 2017; 7: 166.
	 5.	 Daneman R and Prat A. The blood-brain barrier. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2015; 7: a020412.
	 6.	 Xue Q, Liu Y, Qi H, et al. A novel brain neurovascular unit
model with neurons, astrocytes and microvascular endothe-
lial cells of rat. Int J Biol Sci 2013; 9: 174–189.
	 7.	 McConnell HL, Kersch CN, Woltjer RL and Neuwelt EA.
The translational significance of the neurovascular unit. J
Biol Chem 2017; 292: 762–770.
Figure 8.  Anti- glioblastoma efficacy of PTX-PLGA-NPs post
IV and IN administration.
*p < 0.001 PTX-PLGA-NPs (IN) versus PBS group and #p < 0.05 PTX-
PLGA-NPs (IN) versus PTX-PLGA-NPs (IV) respectively.

8
Journal of Applied Biomaterials & Functional Materials 00(0)
	 8.	 Stamatovic SM, Keep RF and Andjelkovic AV. Brain
endothelial cell-cell junctions: how to “open” the blood
brain barrier. Curr Neuropharmacol 2008; 6: 179–192.
	 9.	 Han S, Dwivedi P, Mangrio FA, et  al. Sustained release
paclitaxel-loaded core-shell-structured solid lipid micropar-
ticles for intraperitoneal chemotherapy of ovarian cancer.
Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol 2019; 47: 957–967.
	10.	 Sharma S, Singh J, Verma A, et al. Hyaluronic acid anchored
paclitaxel nanocrystals improves chemotherapeutic efficacy
and inhibits lung metastasis in tumor-bearing rat model.
RSC Adv 2016; 6: 73083–73095.
	11.	 Bharadwaj VN, Nguyen DT, Kodibagkar VD and
Stabenfeldt SE. Nanoparticle-based therapeutics for brain
injury. Adv Healthc Mater 2018; 7(1). DOI: 10.1002/
adhm.201700668.
	12.	 Kiran S, Dwivedi P, Khatik R, et al. Synthesis of functionalized
dipeptide for targeted delivery and pH-sensitive release of chem-
otherapeutics. Chem Commun (Camb) 2019; 56: 285–288.
	13.	 Mangrio FA, Dwivedi P, Han S, et  al. Characteristics of
artemether-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid micro-
particles fabricated by coaxial electrospray: validation of
enhanced encapsulation efficiency and bioavailability. Mol
Pharm 2017; 14: 4725–4733.
	14.	 Dwivedi P, Han S, Mangrio F, et al. Engineered multifunc-
tional biodegradable hybrid microparticles for paclitaxel
delivery in cancer therapy. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol
Appl 2019; 102: 113–123.
	15.	 Saraiva C, Praça C, Ferreira R, Santos T, Ferreira L and
Bernardino L. Nanoparticle-mediated brain drug delivery:
overcoming blood–brain barrier to treat neurodegenerative
diseases. J Control Release 2016; 235: 34–47.
	16.	 Md S, Bhattmisra SK, Zeeshan F, et al. Nano-carrier ena-
bled drug delivery systems for nose to brain targeting for the
treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. J Drug Deliv Sci
Technol 2018; 43: 295–310.
	17.	 Lu C-T, Zhao Y-Z, Wong HL, Cai J, Peng L and Tian X-Q.
Current approaches to enhance CNS delivery of drugs across
the brain barriers. Int J Nanomedicine 2014; 9: 2241–2257.
	18.	 Salazar I, Sanchez-Quinteiro P, Barrios AW, López Amado
M and Vega JA. Chapter 4 - Anatomy of the olfactory
mucosa. In: Doty RL (ed.) Handbook of clinical neurology.
Elsevier, 2019, pp.47–65.
	19.	 Crowe TP, Greenlee MHW, Kanthasamy AG and Hsu WH.
Mechanism of intranasal drug delivery directly to the brain.
Life Sci 2018; 195: 44–52.
	20.	 Erdő F, Bors LA, Farkas D, Bajza Á and Gizurarson S.
Evaluation of intranasal delivery route of drug administra-
tion for brain targeting. Brain Res Bull 2018; 143: 155–170.
	21.	 Zhang Z, Wang X, Li B, et al. Paclitaxel-loaded PLGA micro-
spheres with a novel morphology to facilitate drug delivery
and antitumor efficiency. RSC Adv 2018; 8: 3274–3285.
	22.	 Singh R, Kesharwani P, Mehra NK, Singh S, Banerjee S
and Jain NK. Development and characterization of folate
anchored Saquinavir entrapped PLGA nanoparticles for anti-
tumor activity. Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2015; 41: 1888–1901.
	23.	 Zhao M, Bozzato E, Joudiou N, et al. Codelivery of pacli-
taxel and temozolomide through a photopolymerizable
hydrogel prevents glioblastoma recurrence after surgical
resection. J Control Release 2019; 309: 72–81.
	24.	 Salamanca CH, Barrera-Ocampo A, Lasso JC, Camacho
N and Yarce CJ. Franz diffusion cell approach for pre-for-
mulation characterisation of ketoprofen semi-solid dosage
forms. Pharmaceutics 2018; 10: 148.
	25.	 Xu P, Gullotti E, Tong L, et al. Intracellular drug delivery
by poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles, revisited.
Mol Pharm 2009; 6: 190–201.
	26.	 Zhan C, Gu B, Xie C, Li J, Liu Y and Lu W. Cyclic RGD
conjugated
poly(ethylene
glycol)-co-poly(lactic
acid)
micelle enhances paclitaxel anti-glioblastoma effect. J
Control Release 2010; 143: 136–142.
	27.	 Szentirmai O, Baker CH, Bullain SS, et  al. Successful
inhibition of intracranial human glioblastoma multiforme
xenograft growth via systemic adenoviral delivery of solu-
ble endostatin and soluble vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor receptor-2: laboratory investigation. J Neurosurg 2008;
108: 979–988.