[image]
Journal of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences
All journalsAll articlesSpecial issuesSubmit your research
Search
[image]
Journal of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences
ArticlesSpecial issuesEditorial board
About journal
About journal
•  Scope
•  Mission & scope
•  Editorial and Advisory Boards
•  Associate editors
•  Advisory board
•  Journal information
•  CSPS updates
•  Open access statement
•  Copyright statement
•  Editorial & quality processes
•  Contact
•  For authors
•  Why publish with us?
•  Publishing fees
•  Article types
•  Author guidelines
•  Review guidelines
•  Policies and publication ethics
•  Submission checklist
•  Contact editorial office
•  For reviewers
•  For reviewers
All journalsAll articlesSpecial issuesSubmit your research
Journal of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences
ArticlesSpecial issuesEditorial board
About journal
About journal

•  Scope
•  Mission & scope
•  Editorial and Advisory Boards
•  Associate editors
•  Advisory board
•  Journal information
•  CSPS updates
•  Open access statement
•  Copyright statement
•  Editorial & quality processes
•  Contact
•  For authors
•  Why publish with us?
•  Publishing fees
•  Article types
•  Author guidelines
•  Review guidelines
•  Policies and publication ethics
•  Submission checklist
•  Contact editorial office
•  For reviewers
•  For reviewers
[image]
Journal of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences
ArticlesSpecial issuesEditorial board
About journal
About journal
•  Scope
•  Mission & scope
•  Editorial and Advisory Boards
•  Associate editors
•  Advisory board
•  Journal information
•  CSPS updates
•  Open access statement
•  Copyright statement
•  Editorial & quality processes

•  Contact
•  For authors
•  Why publish with us?
•  Publishing fees
•  Article types
•  Author guidelines
•  Review guidelines
•  Policies and publication ethics
•  Submission checklist
•  Contact editorial office
•  For reviewers
•  For reviewers
Submit your researchSearch
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci., 06 August 2024
Volume 27 - 2024 | https://doi.org/10.3389/jpps.2024.13148
Published in
[image]
Journal of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences
•  4.3 impact factor
•  6.5 citescore
Editor
Edited by
FJ
Fakhreddin Jamali

Faculty of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Alberta, Canada
Outline
•
Abstract
•
Introduction
•
Materials and methods
•
Results
•
Discussion
•
Data availability statement
•
Author contributions
•
Funding
•
Acknowledgments
•
Conflict of interest
•
References

Figures and Tables

•  FIGURE 1

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 2

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 3

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 4

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 5

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 6

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 7

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 8

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 9

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 10

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 11

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 12

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 13

[image]
View in article

•  FIGURE 14

[image]
View in article

•  TABLE 1

Zetasizer results (n = 3) of PLGA, PLGA-COS NPs.

View in article

•  TABLE 2

Zetasizer results (n = 3) of PLGA, PLGA-COS NPs over a 48 h
period to assess stability.

View in article

•  TABLE 3

Curcumin drug loading of PLGA NPs through direct
dissolution of NP (n = 3).

View in article

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci., 06 August 2024
Volume 27 - 2024 | https://doi.org/10.3389/jpps.2024.13148
Development of modular
polymeric nanoparticles for
drug delivery using amine
reactive chemistry
CW
Calvin Wong 1
EA
Emmanuel A. Ho 1,2*
•  1. School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada
•  2. Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada

 Article metrics

1
Citations
1,5k
Views
714
Downloads
Abstract
Curcumin has been explored for its anti-cancer potential, but is
severely limited by its hydrophobicity and sensitivity to light and
water. In this study, poly (lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA)
nanoparticles (NPs) were synthesized to encapsulate curcumin via
single emulsion method to improve curcumin stability and
bioavailability. The PLGA NPs were coated with oligomeric chitosan
(COS) and RGD peptide (a peptide consisting of Arg-Gly-Asp) using
amine-reactive chemistry (NHS and EDC). Both COS and RGD had
been previously shown to accumulate and target many different
types of cancer cells. NPs were characterised based on size
distribution, zeta potential, and binding efficiency of RGD peptide.
They were also evaluated on encapsulation efficiency, and stability,
of curcumin within the NPs. OVCAR-3 cancer cells were treated
with COS and RGD-coated PLGA NPs loaded with Coumarin-6 dye
for fluorescent imaging of cell uptake. They were also treated with
curcumin-loaded NPs to determine cytotoxicity and effectiveness of
delivery. The NPs exhibited size distribution and zeta potential
within expected values, though binding efficiency of RGD was low.
Curcumin-loaded NPs showed significant increase in cytotoxicity
over free (unencapsulated) curcumin, and void (empty) NPs,
suggesting successful delivery of curcumin as an anti-cancer agent;
the performance of COS and RGD coated NPs over bare PLGA NPs
was inconclusive, however, optimization will be required to
improve formulation during the coating steps. This method of NP
synthesis serves as proof of concept for a modular solution to the

development of various coated polymeric NPs for other drugs or
applications.
Introduction
Challenges in chemotherapy development
Cancer is one of the leading causes of death worldwide, accounting
for nearly 10 million deaths in 2020 [1]. In Canada alone, over 1.5
million individuals have lived or are living with cancer, with over
230,000 new cases and 85,000 deaths in 2022. It is estimated that
43% of people will be diagnosed with cancer in their lifetime [2].
While incidence and death rates have slowly but steadily declined
in recent decades, cancer remains a major concern with an aging
and growing population.
Chemotherapy is extremely important in the treatment of cancer; in
some instances, it is the primary treatment method, particularly
with non-solid tumours like leukemia. However, in many instances,
chemotherapy is an adjunctive treatment, used with or after surgery
or radiation therapy, as patient relapse or metastasis is common
[3]. Several factors go into deciding the therapeutic response to a
tumour diagnosis. Tumour type is most obvious, as tumour cells
have differing sensitivity, responsiveness, or resistance to various
therapeutic agents. L-asparaginase, for example, is known to be
effective against lymphocytic leukemias, depriving those cells of
asparagine, which is essential to their function and survival [4].
Tumour location can pose specific challenges to treatment, such as
the difficulty of delivering chemotherapeutic agents to a relatively
avascular region, or across the blood-brain-barrier. High doses can
systematically force drug to the desired site, but this also risks high
systemic toxicity. Smaller tumours tend to be more responsive to
treatment than larger tumours; many chemotherapeutic agents
work on cells in active growth cycles, and smaller tumours tend to
have a larger fraction of cells in this phase [5]. Smaller tumour
burden also tends to correlate with healthier patient condition,
which often means the patient is able to better tolerate the toxicity
of the chemotherapy.
In general, treatment is limited by the negative effects a

chemotherapeutic agent has on healthy cells. The ratio of doses
between therapeutic effect and toxicity is known as “therapeutic
index.” Some adverse effects due to chemotherapy toxicity include
gastrointestinal distress, muscular weakness, alopecia, and loss of
sensation. However, more severe side effects include cardiac
damage, liver damage, and leukopenia/thrombocytopenia, which
leaves patients vulnerable to infection or hemorrhaging,
respectively [6].
The goal in development of chemotherapy technology is to increase
the therapeutic index of both existing and novel treatments and
agents. This can be done by increasing the therapeutic effect of an
agent, and by decreasing its toxicity. Stronger chemotherapeutic
agents have been in development to combat drug-resistant tumours
that often lead to treatment failure or patient relapse [3]; they are
designed to more aggressively eliminate a larger percentage of
tumour cells. Unfortunately, many of these agents do not make it
past clinical trials to market, as their increased effectiveness against
tumour cells also corresponds with an increased toxicity to healthy
cells, leading to more severe systemic toxicity. In addition to
toxicity, the development of new chemotherapy drugs is largely
limited by bioavailability – the amount of drug in systemic
circulation in the body; bioavailability affects the frequency and
dosage required for a drug to reach therapeutic concentrations [7].
Hydrophobicity, degradation under physiological conditions or
enzymatic processes, and rapid renal clearance are all factors that
can negatively impact a drug’s bioavailability and efficacy.
Curcumin, derived from the herb, Curcuma longa (commonly known
as turmeric in the culinary world), has been identified to have anti-
cancer potential due to its ability to interact with a wide range of
molecular targets, including multiple signalling pathways related to
cancer growth and progression [8–12]. However, its use is limited
by hydrophobicity, low bioavailability. And rapid decomposition at
neutral or alkaline pH, or exposure to light.
One subset of the field of nanomedicine focuses not on the
development of novel drugs and other therapeutic agents, but
instead on the development of technologies to improve properties of
existing chemotherapeutic agents. Nano and microscale structures
and systems greatly expand the potential for drug delivery through

several potential factors. Depending on the delivery system, they
can assist in drug stability and circulatory half-life, enhance the
viability of normally low bioavailable drugs, and/or facilitate
targeted delivery and uptake [13]. As a result, these systems can
increase therapeutic efficacy, reduce toxicological side effects, and
improve patient compliance [14]. Polymeric NPs in particular have
been explored as attractive nanoscale drug carriers. Encapsulation
of drugs into these nanostructures improves stability and effective
solubility, and polymeric NPs have been shown to be easily
synthesized through both “bottom-up” methods (e.g.,
nanoprecipitation, salting out) [15, 16] and “top-down” methods
(e.g., solvent emulsion) [17].
Synthetic and natural polymers in NP synthesis
Several synthetic polymers including poly (lactic-co-glycolic) acid
(PLGA) and poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) have been approved for
use as drug delivery carriers worldwide. PLGA is biocompatible and
biodegradable, and its biodegradation and release rate can be
controlled by modifying the ratio between the hydrophobic and
hydrophilic units (lactic and glycolic acid, respectively) [13, 18].
PLGA nanoparticles encapsulating either hydrophobic or
hydrophilic drugs can be easily synthesized using the single or
double emulsion method, respectively, and will slowly degrade via
hydrolysis to release its load over a period of weeks to months [17].
Additionally, the interest in natural polymers (chitosan, hyaluronic
acid, cellulose, etc.) as drug delivery nanomaterial candidates have
grown, due to general factors such as biocompatibility,
biodegradability, inexpensiveness, and availability [19–21].
Specifically, chitosan has been investigated as a nanocarrier due to
the amine groups along its backbone, which make it the only
positively charged polysaccharide, and provide reliable points of
conjugation for targeting moieties and other structural
modifications [22, 23]. A 2014 study showed that chitosan-coated
nanoparticles exhibited significant mucoadhesive properties
compared to their uncoated counterparts; it is suggested that this
property is related to the electrostatic forces between the cationic
backbone and negatively charged groups within mucin proteins
[23]; another study showed its potential to accumulate in tumour

cells [22]. However, chitosan is limited by its low solubility in non-
acidic environments, high viscosity in dilute aqueous acidic
environments, limited drug release, and low encapsulation
efficiency [19, 22, 24]. Instead, chitooligosaccharides (COS), an
oligomer of chitosan that can be prepared by depolymerization of
chitosan with nitrous acid or hydrochloric acid, has been explored
as an alternative that retains chitosan’s desirable physical and
chemical properties, while also having better solubility at relatively
higher pH [24]. Control over average oligomer length of nitrous
acid depolymerization has been shown to be controllable through
the stoichiometric ratio between chitosan and nitrous acid [24–26].
This depolymerization also results in a reactive aldehyde group on
one end of COS oligomers, which can be functionalized with a
variety of groups or moieties.
The properties of synthetic polymers and natural polymers as
nanomaterials compliment each other; the former provides
tunability of drug release and simple nanostructure synthesis, while
the latter provides customization of functional groups and targeting
moieties for improved targeting and properties tailored to specific
physiological environments. Recent studies have created hybrid
nanostructures of synthetic and natural polymers, with synthetic
polymers acting as the core structure and natural polymers acting as
a coating, indirectly bound by adsorption and intermolecular forces
[21, 23, 27]. Some studies have explored PLGA core, chitosan-
coated NPs as potential drug nanocarriers [27, 28].
Reliance on physical adsorption for coating of natural polymers
may result in decreased stability and sensitivity to changes in pH,
ions, temperature, and/or solvents. In contrast, chemical
conjugation via forms of linker chemistry can be more resilient, as
well as less reliant on physical and electrostatic compatibility of
polymer moieties. Amine-reactive crosslinker chemistry can allow
for relatively straightforward and facile chemical conjugation
because the reaction is regioselective and occurs under benign
conditions (aqueous, room temperature, moderate pH) [29]. NHS
ester groups, which can be created by modifying carboxyl groups
with EDC [N-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide
hydrochloride] and stabilized with NHS (N-hydroxysuccinimide),
are often used as an amine-specific functional group for linking or

labelling [30].
Integrins and active targeting
While chitosan has been shown to have potential for passive
targeting of tumour cells, various ligands can be used in active
targeting. Integrins are receptors found in the extracellular matrix
(ECM), and are mainly involved in cell-cell and cell-ECM adhesion
interactions [31]. Of these integrins, the αvβ3 integrin is among the
most important in tumour angiogenesis, and is overexpressed in
several tumour types including ovarian and breast cancers [32]. The
αvβ3 integrin serves as a receptors to many ECM molecules that
contain the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide sequence; as such, ligands
based on the RGD peptide, as well as RGD mimetics, have been
shown to deliver targeted therapeutic doses of anticancer drugs like
Paclitaxel and Doxorubicin to tumour cells [31, 33–35]. The
presence of -COOH carboxyl groups in RGD peptide allows for
conjugation to COS via NHS-amine reactive chemistry. This allows
COS-coated PLGA-core NPs to be functionalized with RGD peptide
for active targeting and drug delivery.
The main objective of this study was to develop a modular
nanocarrier system utilising facile assembly and conjugation
methods that could used with interchangeable core and coating
materials, to accelerate successful development of chemotherapy
agents. NPs were assembled through the commonly used emulsion
method, with PLGA as the core material, and curcumin as the
encapsulated model drug. These NPs were coated with COS and
RGD in tandem to promote targeting of cancer cells. Figure 1
illustrates the proposed formation of these NPs Physical properties
of coated NPs were compared to bare PLGA NPs, and the
formulations were compared in vitro via fluorescent cell uptake
study and cytotoxicity assay with OVCAR-3 human ovarian tumour
cells. This project hypothesizes that PLGA NPs will successfully
encapsulate curcumin to protect it from degradation and provide
prolonged release, and that NPs coated with COS and RGD will
provide better uptake and cytotoxic effects compared to bare PLGA
NPs.
FIGURE 1

[image]
Illustration of PLGA-COS-RGD NP encapsulating curcumin drug.
Created in Biorender.com.
Materials and methods
Materials
Adipic acid dihydrazide, ammonium hydroxide solution (28.0–30%
NH3 basis), ammonium acetate, chitosan (low molecular weight;
50,000–190,000 Da, 75–85% de-acetylated), curcumin [≥94%
(curcuminoid content), ≥80%], dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), glacial
acetic acid, hydrochloric acid (37%) (HCl), MES (4-
Morpholineethanesulfonic acid), methanol, methylene chloride
(DCM), N-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC), N-Hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), RGD peptide
(Arg-Gly-Asp), sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN), sodium
nitrite (NaNO2), trehalose dihydrate were all purchased from Sigma
Aldrich. PLGA-COOH [poly (lactic-co-glycolic) acid] (50:50, and
40 K MW) was purchased from Nanosoft Polymers. Cytiva
HyClone™ RPMI 1640 Media with Glutamine, Gibco™ Fetal Bovine
Serum (certified, heat inactivated), Gibco™ Penicillin-Streptomycin,
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 1X, pH 7.4), Pierce Micro BCA
Protein Assay kit, Promega CellTiter 96™ AQueous One Solution
Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS) were purchased from Thermo Fisher.
Functional chitooligosaccharide synthesis
COS was prepared from chitosan through nitrous acid
depolymerization (shown in Figure 2) based on the protocols by
Moussa [24, 26]; low MW chitosan was dissolved in 0.15 M HCl
(2 g chitosan per 100 mL solution), then vacuum degassed to
remove oxygen from the solution. 500 mM NaNO2 aqueous solution
was prepared (with degassed MilliQ water, immediately before
addition to chitosan solution), which was then added for a
GlcN:NaNO2 molar ratio of 10:1 (to achieve COS with
approximately 20 average GlcN units), before being stirred
moderately overnight so as not to introduce excess oxygen to the

mixture. The mixture was filtered to remove undissolved chitosan
and other impurities, before precipitating COS by addition of
ammonium hydroxide until reaching solution pH 9. To further
increase yield, an equal volume of methanol was added to the
mixture, which was then centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g and
4°C. The COS was washed (x3) by repeated centrifugation in 50/50
water/methanol, before a final wash step with water. The COS was
then resuspended in 10 mL water and lyophilized.
FIGURE 2

[image]
Nitrous acid depolymerization of chitosan, forming 2,5-anhydro-D-
mannofuranose (amf) moiety, which contains a reactive aldehyde
group.
Hydrazide functionalized COS (COS-hydrazide) was prepared by
dissolving COS in water, with additions of acetic acid. Concentrated
MES was then added to a concentration of 0.15 M, before adjusting
the solution to pH 4.5 with NaOH or HCl. 10 M equivalents (to
COS) of adipic dihydrazide was added to solution and stirred at RT
for 24 h, then 10 M equivalents (to COS) of sodium
cyanoborohydride was added to solution and stirred at RT for 24 h.
As depicted in Figure 3, the COS aldehyde functional group reacts
with the hydrazide under acidic conditions to form a hydrazone
conjugate, which is further reduced to a secondary amine bond by
sodium cyanoborohydride. The COS-hydrazide solution was filtered,
precipitated, washed and lyophilized following the same protocol as
COS. COS and COS-hydrazide were analysed with 1H NMR
spectroscopy to confirm average size and presence of aldehyde or
hydrazide groups, respectively. 1H NMR spectroscopy was
performed on Bruker 500 MHz spectrometer at 300 K. Samples
were diluted in deuterated solvent (D2O) to 10 mg/mL; 5 μL HCl
(12 M) was added to 1000 μL COS samples to facilitate dissolution
in D2O. NMR spectra was analysed using Bruker TopSpin NMR data
analysis software.
FIGURE 3

[image]
Reaction between hydrazide and aldehyde, which forms hydrazone
conjugate. The hydrazone double bond is further reduced to a more
stable secondary amine by NaBH3CN.
Synthesis of PLGA-COS NPs
Void (without encapsulated drug) PLGA NPs were prepared by
emulsion method, based loosely on the works of Rafiei and McCall
[17, 36]. The initial emulsion mixture consisted of 1:4 v/v organic
to aqueous parts. The organic portion was PLGA (acid-terminated)
dissolved in DCM to a concentration of 50 mg/mL, while the
aqueous portion was 3% w/v PVA. The mixture was briefly
vortexed, then emulsified under ice bath via tip sonication. Tip
sonication of NP samples were performed with QSonica Q125
Sonicator. Samples were sonicated at 60% amplitude, at 15 s ON,
5 s OFF pulse, for 90 s. The tip was moved around in sample
solution during initial sonication pulse to ensure all the organic
portion was fully emulsified. The emulsified mixture was then
diluted with 1% PVA solution to 300% of its original volume and
stirred for 3 h to evaporate the organic solvent. The NP mixture was
centrifuged (15,000 g, 10 min, 4°C) and washed with water (x3) to
remove excess PVA, before being resuspended in 5 mL DI water
(and 5% w/v trehalose as cryoprotectant if necessary) and frozen
for lyophilization. A small aliquot was reserved for measuring NP
size and zeta potential (ZP). Particle size/distribution and zeta
potential of NPs were respectively measured by dynamic light
scattering (DLS) and electrophoretic light scattering (ELS) using
Malvern Zetasizer Ultra-Red.
PLGA-COS NPs were formed by chemically conjugating COS-
hydrazide to the surface of PLGA NPs using amine-reactive NHS
chemistry (see Figure 4). COS-hydrazide was dissolved in a small
amount of dilute o-phosphoric acid, before being added to MES
buffer (100 mM, pH 5) to a COS concentration of 5 mg/mL. PLGA
NPs were added resuspended in this solution (2:1 PLGA:COS w/w),
along with NHS and EDC (approx. 20%, 30% w/w PLGA NPs,
respectively). The mixture was stirred vigorously overnight before
washing excess NHS, EDC, and COS through centrifugation. A small

aliquot was reserved for measuring NP size and ZP, while the rest
was prepared for lyophilization as previously described with PLGA
NPs.
FIGURE 4

[image]
Secondary amide formation between NHS and hydrazide group,
which links COS to PLGA. This reaction occurs under acidic
conditions (pH 4-5).
Synthesis of PLGA-COS-RGD NPs
RGD peptide was chemically conjugated to COS amine groups
through amine-reactive NHS chemistry. 1 mg RGD peptide was
added to 10 mL MES buffer (100 mM, pH 6.5) along with 0.5 mg
NHS, and 2 mg EDC. PLGA-COS NPs were added and resuspended
in the buffer solution through vortexing (and mild sonication if
necessary). The NP mixture was stirred overnight, before being
centrifuged to separate NP from free RGD. BCA assay was
performed on samples of supernatant to determine binding
efficiency of RGD to the NPs. NHS concentration across all samples
and standards were kept constant for BCA assay analysis, due to the
affect and interference of NHS (by reducing the Cu compound in
BCA reagent). BCA and other colourimetric assays were recorded
and analysed using Varioskan LUX 3020 Multimode Microplate
Reader.
PLGA-CUR NPs
Synthesis
Curcumin-encapsulated PLGA NPs (PLGA-CUR NPs) were prepared
by emulsion method, similar to void PLGA NPs (Synthesis of PLGA-
COS NPs). Curcumin was dissolved in DCM alongside PLGA (1:10
curcumin: PLGA, w/w), then added to the aqueous solution
containing PVA. After emulsion and stirring to evaporate DCM
solvent, the NP mixture was filtered through Whatman Grade 1
filter paper to remove precipitated and aggregated curcumin, before
centrifugation and washing steps.
UPLC analysis
Analysis of curcumin content was performed using UPLC, using

Waters Acquity UPLC H-Class Plus system. The column used was
Waters ACQUITY UPLC HSS C18 Column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 2.1 mm
× 100 mm; pore size, diameter, dimensions). Mobile phases were
as follows: phase A – acetonitrile (ACN) (100%); phase B – 10%
acetonitrile, 90% 10 mM o-phosphoric acid aqueous buffer. For
sample analysis, flow parameters of each run were kept at constant
flow rate of 0.4 mL/min, with gradient mobile phase composition.
Percentage composition is given as XX% (by volume) mobile phase
A; the remaining mobile phase is composed of mobile phase B.
From 0 to 0.5 min, 44.4% A. From 0.5 to 1.0 min, gradient
increases from 44.4% to 77.7% A. This gradient is held until
3.5 min. From 3.5 to 4 min, gradient is decreased back to 44.4% A,
and held for the rest of the run. PDA UV-Vis absorbance detector
was set at 430 nm.
Encapsulation efficiency
Due to the hydrophobic nature of curcumin, indirect measurement
of encapsulation efficiency (EE) and drug-loading efficiency (DL)
through the supernatant post-synthesis was not feasible. Instead, a
known mass of lyophilized curcumin-loaded NPs were dissolved in
organic solvent. These samples were analysed via UV-Vis
absorbance plate reader and compared against a standard curve of
curcumin (100–10,000 ng/mL) dissolved in ACN. The calculated
concentration was compared to the initial amount of curcumin and
theoretical maximum encapsulation concentration (10% NP mass,
based on the synthesis parameters) to determine EE% and DL%,
respectively.
Degradation and release study
Curcumin-encapsulated NPs were resuspended in 50 mL PBS buffer
(pH 7.2) to 2500 ng/mL (or 500 ng/mL) curcumin, using DL% of
the NPs to find the required mass of NPs to achieve desired
concentration. This solution was stirred, and 1 mL aliquots were
taken at various time points for up to 72 h. These aliquots were
treated based on the experiment: either curcumin within only the
supernatant, only the NP pellet, or the entire solution was
measured. Degradation of curcumin in NPs vs. free curcumin was
measured within the entire solution; this simply required dilution

with ACN followed by centrifugation (20,000 g for 5 min) to
remove any insoluble precipitate. Samples were then transferred to
UPLC vials for analysis. Supernatant or NP pellet samples were
prepared by separating the two via centrifugation (20,000 g for
5 min), to separate free curcumin from NP pellet. The supernatant
was then mixed with ACN to match UPLC mobile phase
composition and transferred to UPLC vials. If NP pellet content was
to be measured, ACN was added to fully dissolve PLGA NPs, then
diluted with buffer to mobile phase composition and transferred to
UPLC vials. Curcumin was quantitated against a standard
calibration curve from 50 to 4000 ng/mL.
Cell uptake study
The cell uptake study was designed to assess the effectiveness of the
COS-RGD-coated NPs at targeting tumour cells versus bare PLGA
NPs. RGD peptides have previously been shown to effectively target
OVCAR-3 human ovarian carcinoma cells; thus the cell line was
used in this study [37]. To better visually compare treatments,
Coumarin-6, a hydrophobic fluorescent dye, was used as a
replacement encapsulant to curcumin. Coumarin-6 achieves peak
excitation around 457 nm.
Briefly, OVCAR-3 cells were cultured and then seeded in a 96-well
plate, letting cells incubate for 24 h at 37°C and 5% CO2.
Coumarin-6 in PLGA NPs, PLGA-COS NPs, PLGA-COS-RGD NPs, or
free Coumarin-6 (1000 ng/mL) was suspended in cell medium and
added to the wells, incubating for another 24 h under the same
conditions. The plates were washed with PBS solution, then cells
were fixated with formaldehyde solution (4%), and finally stained
with DAPI solution (300 nM) for 5 min. The plates were once again
washed with PBS and then imaged with fluorescent microscopy.
The DAPI stain and Coumarin-6 each showed up under separate
channels. ImageJ was used to quantify average fluorescent intensity
of Coumarin-6 within cells to determine relative uptake.
Cell toxicity study
As a further demonstration of the delivery effectiveness of PLGA
NPs, OVCAR-3 cells were treated with NP-encapsulated and free

curcumin for up to 24 h. The different treatments were compared
with varying curcumin concentrations (between 2.5 and 40 μg/mL)
and treatment times (between 2 and 24 h). To isolate the effects of
the delivered curcumin and the NPs themselves, OVCAR-3 cells
were also treated for 24 h with void NPs, at the highest and lowest
void NP concentrations equivalent to the loaded NP treatments.
This void treatment would help determine if the NPs were
contributing to cell toxicity directly, in addition to their delivery of
curcumin drug.
OVCAR-3 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at 5000 cells/well
and incubated for 24 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. Treatment medium
was produced by resuspending NPs in cell culture medium; free
curcumin treatment medium to assist in dispersion of curcumin,
which was insoluble in the aqueous medium. After incubation of
cells, old medium was replaced with treatment medium, and the
cells were incubated under the same conditions as prior (for 24 h in
all non-time-dependent studies). After treatment incubation, cells
were washed several times with PBS to remove residual curcumin;
MTS assay was then performed with Promega CellTiter 96™
AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay, following the
recommended protocol. Colourimetric results from the MTS assay
were quantified with Varioskan microplate reader.
Statistical analysis
All experiments were conducted in triplicate. Data was statistically
analysed by unpaired t-test and one-way ANOVA where applicable.
In cases where ANOVA found statistical significance, Tukey’s test
was used to determine which groups contained statistical
differences. The value of α = 0.05 was used to determine whether
results were statistically significant.
Results
Chitosan oligomer characteristics
Depolymerization was successfully confirmed with 1H NMR
spectroscopy. The presence of the amf end unit is confirmed by the

small peak at 5.01 ppm that corresponds to the aldehyde proton
(specifically the hydrated form of the aldehyde), as well as peaks at
4.05, 4.15, and 4.36 ppm 1H spectra are corroborated by NMR data
of COS from the Moussa study [24, 26]. By comparing the H-2 GlcN
to H-1, 3, 4 or 5 amf proton signals in Figure 5, we can see that the
average length of each COS molecule is around 20 GlcN units to
every amf end unit. Control of the average length of COS was
shown to be relatively replicable; average of triplicate samples of
COS using a 10:1 GlcN/NaNO2 molar ratio showed an average
observed length of 21.8 ± 1.8 units. Stoichiometric control was
further confirmed by increasing the amount of NaNO2 and
observing a change in average oligomer length; average of triplicate
samples of COS using a 10:1 GlcN/NaNO2 molar ratio showed an
average observed length of 10.6 ± 2.4 units.
FIGURE 5

[image]
1H NMR spectrum of COS sample, with GlcN to amf ratio of 20. The
aldehyde proton (H-1 amf) shows up in its hydrated form.
The successful attachment of adipic hydrazide to COS through the
amf aldehyde group is confirmed by the absence of the hydrated
aldehyde peak (5.01 ppm) as the reaction site, as well as the
presence of peaks at 1.57 and 2.31 ppm that correspond to the
aliphatic carbon chains between the hydrazide groups, as seen in
Figure 6.
FIGURE 6

[image]
1H NMR spectrum of COS-hydrazide sample.
NP characteristics
PLGA NPs were successfully synthesized by emulsion method; their
characteristics were replicated by maintaining consistent
parameters including polymer concentration, organic to aqueous
ratio, PVA content, and sonication intensity. Similarly prepared
PLGA-COS NPs were also prepared, and both were characterized by
size, PDI and ZP (zeta potential) via Zetasizer (results shown in
Table 1). Both PLGA and PLGA-COS NPs have a similar size (less
than 300 nm average), and a relatively narrow PDI (less than 0.05).
The COS coating did not appear to affect the size or PDI of the NPs
significantly. The negative ZP of PLGA NPs is mainly due to the
carboxyl end groups of PLGA molecules at the surface of the NPs.
The positive ZP of PLGA-COS NPs suggests the successful coating of
COS to the PLGA NP surface, due to the presence of positively
charged amine groups in COS. However, PLGA COS NPs could not
be directly characterized via 1H NMR, as the NPs encountered
solubility issues -- likely due to the fact that the PLGA portion is
highly soluble in organic solvents while the COS portion is highly
insoluble in organic solvents, and requires relatively acidic
conditions to facilitate solubility even in aqueous media.
TABLE 1

Z-avg size
(d, nm)
PDI
Zeta potential
(mV)
PLGA NPs
221.7 ± 19.7 0.085 ±
0.054
−15.2 ± 0.7
PLGA COS NPs
229.2 ± 50.2 0.119 ±
0.056
+26.1 ± 1.2
PLGA NPs (w/
curcumin)*
281.2 ± 23.4 0.238 ±
0.060
N/A
PLGA COS NPs (w/
curcumin)*
278.8 ±
102.0
0.195 ±
0.080
N/A
Zetasizer results (n = 3) of PLGA, PLGA-COS NPs.
*NP results containing encapsulated curcumin. Fluorescence of
curcumin negatively affects results.
When comparing PLGA NPs with and without encapsulated
curcumin (via t-test), there was statistically significant difference in
NP size and PDI. Comparisons between samples of PLGA COS NPs
with and without encapsulated curcumin did not conclude a
statistically significant difference. It is however, important to note
that curcumin exhibits some fluorescent properties, which caused
interference with both the DLS and ELS techniques employed by the
Zetasizer to obtain size and ZP data. Fluorescence filters were able
to mitigate interference when determining size, but attempts to
determine ZP were highly inconsistent. It is highly unlikely that
surface charge is affected by encapsulation of drug.
NP and COS coating stability was further investigated by Zetasizer
measurements of size, PDI and ZP over a 48 h period, where NP
samples (unloaded) were left in aqueous buffer (PBS 1X, pH 7.2,
RT) and measured in the Zetasizer at various time points (shown in
Table 2). Statistical analysis (ANOVA, α = 0.05) did not show
statistically significant changes to either size or ZP in either group
over the full 48 h, suggesting that the NPs themselves are relatively
stable over the short term, and that the positively charged COS
coating remains adhered to the surface, even when dispersed in an
aqueous medium.

TABLE 2

Time (h)
Z-avg size (d,
nm)
PDI
ZP (mV)
PLGA NP
0
224.5 ± 25.3
0.025 ±
0.015
−14.4 ±
0.8
12
246.1 ±
21.4
0.038 ± 0.011 −21.0 ±
0.8
24
242.9 ±
22.0
0.051 ± 0.014 −17.5 ±
3.0
48
247.2 ±
26.1
0.035 ± 0.037 −22.1 ±
6.2
PLGA COS
NP
0
258.3 ± 7.5
0.102 ±
0.019
26.3 ± 0.4
12
275.5 ±
31.2
0.124 ± 0.034 24.7 ± 0.6
24
279.3 ±
58.3
0.034 ± 0.023 24.6 ± 0.3
48
275.4 ±
27.1
0.137 ± 0.032 25.3 ± 4.0
Zetasizer results (n = 3) of PLGA, PLGA-COS NPs over a 48 h
period to assess stability.
RGD coating onto PLGA-COS NPs were confirmed by BCA assay of
both the supernatant solution, and the NPs directly. The standard
curves (Figure 7), which compared the curves of RGD peptide, NHS,
and RGD peptide with a controlled concentration of NHS, confirm
that NHS interference with BCA assay is consistent and predictable,
and that maintaining the same concentration across samples/
standards minimizes potential variance due to its presence. The
supernatant samples, which contained NHS from the binding
reaction, were analysed against the RGD standards containing
12 μg/mL NHS, and diluted appropriately to match this
concentration. The NP samples, which were centrifuged and washed
of residual reaction reagents, were analysed against RGD standards
without NHS. The assays showed a 12.9% ± 0.4% binding
efficiency.

FIGURE 7

[image]
BCA assay standard curves – NHS, RGD, and RGD with controlled
NHS conc. All standards prepared in 100 mM MES buffer, pH 5, N
= 3. R2 > 0.99 for all standard curves.
Curcumin-loading results
Drug loading and encapsulation efficiency
Samples of curcumin-loaded PLGA NPs were dissolved in 3 different
organic solvents (ACN, ethyl acetate, chloroform) to ensure full
extraction of curcumin from NPs. Each sample was dissolved to an
initial concentration of 1 mg/mL (NP mass) and performed in
triplicate. At 100% theoretical EE, the NPs would contain 10 μg/mL
curcumin. The results are shown in Table 3. Regardless of solvent as
dissolution medium, the results indicate just under 6 μg/mL
curcumin, which equates to 6% drug loading (DL) or 60%
encapsulation efficiency (EE). These encapsulation efficiency results
were below expected values based on similar studies, but within
acceptable range for subsequent testing [38, 39]. Degradation of
curcumin during synthesis, processing, or storage may account for
some of this discrepancy.
TABLE 3

Sample
(solvent)
Avg conc (μg/
mL)
SD (μg/mL, n
= 3)
DL%
(%)
EE%
(%)
Acetonitrile
5.58
0.13
5.58
56
Ethyl Acetate
5.95
0.04
5.95
59
Chloroform
5.93
0.15
5.93
59
Curcumin drug loading of PLGA NPs through direct dissolution of
NP (n = 3).
Degradation and release study
To determine the difference in degradation of curcumin
encapsulated in NPs and curcumin free in aqueous solution,
triplicate samples of free curcumin, PLGA NP encapsulated
curcumin, and PLGA-COS NP encapsulated curcumin were prepared
by suspending lyophilized loaded NPs in PBS 1X (pH 7.2) to a
curcumin concentration of 2500 ng/mL (free curcumin samples
were prepared by first dissolving curcumin in ACN, then adding to
PBS and placing under vacuum to assist in evaporation of organic
solvent). These samples were allowed to spin at RT for 70 h;
aliquots were taken at various time points and analysed via UPLC.
These aliquots were mixed with organic solvent (ACN) to break the
NPs to release and dissolve the curcumin. After 70 h, it is clear
encapsulated curcumin is resistant to aqueous degradation
compared to the free curcumin control group, as seen in Figure 8.
By 70 h, PLGA and PLGA-COS NP-encapsulated curcumin degraded
to 77% and 66% of its original concentration, respectively;
meanwhile, free curcumin degraded to the point where it was far
below the lowest concentration standard, nearing <1% of its
original concentration. PLGA-COS NP did slightly underperform
relative to PLGA NP samples, though this could be due to the
relatively prolonged processing to add COS-coating affecting
encapsulation characteristics. Based on t-tests comparing sample
groups at the same time points, the difference between PLGA NP
and PLGA-COS NP samples is only statistically significant around
48 h.
FIGURE 8

[image]
UPLC results of degradation of encapsulated curcumin compared to
free curcumin in PBS solution (pH 7.2, RT). Analysis via t-test (n =
3, α = 0.05; (*): p < 0.05) shows some significant between
curcumin (CUR)-loaded PLGA NPs and PLGA COS NP at 48 h and
72 h (marked at top). Free curcumin is shown to degrade
significantly compared to the NP samples even after only 3 h
(marked at bottom).
Cell uptake study
Cell uptake of PLGA NP-encapsulated hydrophobic fluorescent dye
Coumarin-6 was monitored at various time points up to 24 h. This
uptake was compared to a control group with free Coumarin-6. As
shown in Figure 9, free Coumarin-6 (Group A) was unable to enter
the cell even after 24 h of incubation. Meanwhile, Groups B-D
(PLGA NP, PLGA-COS NP, PLGA-COS-RGD NP samples respectively)
all showed faint fluorescent signal, and therefore successful uptake,
even after 0.5 h of incubation.
FIGURE 9

[image]
FLR microscopy of uptake of Coumarin-6 fluorescent dye (green) by
OVCAR-3 cells. Cells incubated in cell medium with Coumarin-6
encapsulated PLGA NPs for up to 24 h. Cell nuclei stained with
DAPI (blue) to contrast. Groups (A–D): {A-free Coumarin-6
(control); B-PLGA NP; C-PLGA-COS NP; D-PLGA-COS-RGD NP}.
White bar in each image represents 200 µm.
The fluorescent images of the OVCAR-3 cells were further analysed
with ImageJ software; average fluorescent intensity of an image was
determined by sampling intensity at 5 different cells in each image.
Results are displayed in Figure 10. Statistical analysis (t-test)
determined fluorescent intensity was not significantly different from
8 h to 24 h in Groups B, C or D, suggesting near maximum uptake
had been reached by 8 h. Similar analysis between Groups B, C, D
showed little statistically significant difference between the overall
uptake after 24 h. This seems to suggest that the coated NPs do not
provide significant improved delivery over bare PLGA NPs.
FIGURE 10

[image]
Mean Coumarin-6 fluorescent intensity values of OVCAR-3 cells
treated with Coumarin-6 encapsulated NPs. Values extracted from
FLR microscopy images using ImageJ analysis software. Analysis [t-
test; n = 5, α = 0.05; (*): p < 0.05] did not find significant
differences between the three NP treatment groups at any time
point; it also only found differences within groups between 2 and
8 h.
Cell toxicity study
OVCAR-3 cells were treated with curcumin-loaded NPs at varying
concentrations from 2.5 to 40 μg/mL (shown in Figure 11). The 3
treatment groups of PLGA NP, PLGA-COS NP, PLGA-COS-RGD NP
were compared to each other and a positive control group of free,
unencapsulated curcumin. Statistical analysis (ANOVA) of MTS
assay indicate that change in cytotoxicity with free
(unencapsulated) curcumin is not statistically significant between
low and high concentrations of curcumin. Comparison of NP-
encapsulated curcumin treated samples via ANOVA and Tukey’s test
indicate significant difference in cytotoxicity with increasing
curcumin concentration; in the 3 NP treatments, more than 5 μg/
mL curcumin is required for a statistical cytotoxic effect, while
cytotoxicity does not meaningfully increase beyond 20 μg/mL
curcumin. IC50 (half-max inhibitory concentration) for all NP
treatment groups appears to fall between 10 and 20 μg/mL; ANOVA
between the three NP treatment groups did not show significant
difference in their cytotoxicity. Specific statistical analysis of
varying concentrations for each treatment group is shown in Figure
12.
FIGURE 11

[image]
Cell viability of 24 h treatment of OVCAR-3 cells at varying
[curcumin] (2.5–40 μg/mL) with MTS assay (n = 3). Statistical
analysis (ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s test) did not find significant
differences between the different curcumin-loaded NP groups;
however, they did exhibit statistical toxicity when compared to
unencapsulated free curcumin.
FIGURE 12

[image]
Statistical analysis (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test) of each
treatment group of OVCAR-3 cells with varying [curcumin] (t =
24 h). 95% CI (α = 0.05), n = 3. (*) denotes comparison between
two concentrations where {p < 0.05}. Any adjacent concentrations
without explicit comparison are assumed to be “n.s.” {p > 0.05}.
OVCAR-3 cells were then treated at various with curcumin-loaded
NPs for up to 24 h, at a concentration of 40 μg/mL based on the
results from Figure 11. As shown in Figure 13, significant
cytotoxicity began to occur after 8 h. At this concentration, cell
viability appeared to reach 50% around the 16 h mark. Again, free
curcumin does not appear to have statistically significant effect on
the cells without the assistance of the NP delivery.
FIGURE 13

[image]
Normalized cell viability of time-dependent treatment of OVCAR-3
cells with curcumin-loaded NPs (40 μg/mL curcumin) over 24 h.
Analysis (t-test, 95% CI (α = 0.05), n = 3) indicates that there is
no significant difference between NP groups (except at 16 h,
between PLGA COS and PLGA COS RGD samples), but there is a
clear effect of the NP samples on cell viability compared to the
minimal effect by free curcumin, occurring between 8 and 16 h.
To control for the effects of only curcumin and to rule out cytotoxic
effects from the NP itself, OVCAR-3 cells were treated with void
NPs over 24 h, shown in Figure 14. Each treatment group had a low
and high treatment concentration, corresponding respectively to the
lowest and highest concentration of curcumin-loaded NPs used in
Figure 11. Statistical t-test analysis of the treatment groups did not
find any statistically significant difference between high and low
concentration samples. The void NPs themselves do not appear to
contribute to the cytotoxicity of the curcumin treatment.
FIGURE 14

[image]
Normalized cell viability of 24 h treatment of OVCAR-3 cells with
void NPs. Low and high concentrations of void NPs correspond to 5
and 40 μg/mL curcumin concentration if the NPs were loaded with
curcumin. ANOVA (95% CI (α = 0.05), n = 3) found no significant
difference between any of the sample groups.
Together, these results, along with the fluorescent imaging of
Coumarin-6 uptake indicates that, on its own, free curcumin is
unable to affect cell viability, most likely due to its insolubility in
aqueous medium. The NPs themselves do not appear to have
cytotoxic effects, but are shown to be successfully uptaken by cells;
when curcumin is encapsulated in these NPs, the curcumin is
successfully uptaken by cells, facilitated by the NPs. Once in the
cells, the curcumin exhibits cytotoxicity to the cancer cells.
Though cell studies overall did not show statistically significant
differences between treatment groups of PLGA, PLGA-COS and
PLGA-COS-RGD NPs, it is possible that an exploration into in vitro
studies comparing healthy mammalian cells to tumour cells like
OVCAR-3 could yield interesting results. The coating process
requires further optimization, but the coating process may assist to
some degree in avoiding uptake by healthy cells in addition to
targeting tumour cells via their receptors.
Discussion
In this study, curcumin was encapsulated in PLGA NPs. PLGA NPs
were successfully synthesized through the emulsion method within
acceptable size range (sub-500 nm diameter), and narrow
distribution. EE% of curcumin was 60%, which was slightly lower
than previous similar studies observed in literature; this may be due
in part to minor degradation during processing and/or storage of
the NPs. The NPs were successfully coated with COS, providing the
nanocarrier with a positively charged surface. The surface was
further modified by chemical addition of RGD peptide, though
binding efficiency was less than 15%. Short-term stability study
showed that the PLGA NPs and the COS coating were stable even
when left in an aqueous solution over 48 h at ambient temperature.

The NP-encapsulated curcumin showed significant resistance to
degradation in buffered aqueous conditions compared to free,
unencapsulated curcumin. Under sink conditions, curcumin was
rapidly released from the PLGA NPs, reaching 100% total release in
less than 12 h. This runs counter to expectations from previous
works with PLGA and curcumin in which those studies showed
prolonged release over the course of several days.
Cell uptake studies using Coumarin-6 dye showed the PLGA NP
ability to successfully deliver the encapsulated hydrophobic dye to
OVCAR-3 cells, compared to unencapsulated Coumarin-6 control,
which was unable to be uptaken by cells even after 24 h incubation.
In cell toxicity studies, OVCAR-3 cancer cells treated with
encapsulated curcumin showed significant toxicity to cells when
compared to free curcumin. Void NP treatment was used to control
for toxic effects from the NP material itself; cytotoxic effects from
those samples were statistically insignificant. Free curcumin did not
appear to show statistically significant cytotoxic effects even at
concentrations where the encapsulated curcumin treatments
experienced cell viability well below 50%. Overall, these results
show the effectiveness of PLGA-based NPs in encapsulating,
stabilizing, and delivering a hydrophobic, water-sensitive drug like
curcumin. Lack of statistical differentiation between PLGA NPs
coated with COS and RGD suggest those coating processes require
further optimization. Further in vitro studies can be explored to
compare uptake of NPs and cell viability after treatment by
mammalian tumour cells vs. healthy mammalian cells.
Overall, the project was successful in synthesizing curcumin-
encapsulating PLGA NPs using the emulsion method. The COS and
RGD coatings showed some success, though further optimization is
required. The functionalization of RGD to the amine-groups of COS
was attempted under pH conditions favouring the conditions for
EDC to react with the carboxyl groups on RGD; there may be more
success in favouring pH conditions that would result in more
deprotonation of the amine groups instead. Further studies are
required to confirm whether the coatings are attached through
chemical binding, or physical adsorption, particularly through more
direct characterization techniques of the chemical composition of
the NPs. This would include 1H NMR and FTIR. Cell studies showed

that the NPs did vastly improve delivery of drug, but differences
between PLGA, PLGA-COS and PLGA-COS-RGD NPs were
inconclusive.
In addition to in vitro studies, in vivo studies might help determine
how effectively the NPs can target tumours, and whether they will
remain in the circulatory system for prolonged periods. In vivo
studies may provide a more accurate assessment of whether the
nanocarrier system can preferentially target tumour cells; with in
vitro tumour cell studies, the cells likely uptake the NPs that are
present in the treatment more quickly than healthy cells, and the
well plate nature of the treatment means that the tumour cells
likely absorb as much of the NPs as they require. On the other
hand, with in vivo studies, the NPs will be circulating but at much
lower overall concentration, which likely means that treatment will
be more reliant on the rate of uptake. One way to measure
effectiveness of treatment would be by measuring relative tumour
sizes over a course of treatments [40]. A major challenge to in vivo
studies will be tracking NP concentrations in the bloodstream, but
also accumulation in tumour tissue vs. healthy tissue or potentially
organs such as the kidneys/liver. While tracking drug in the
bloodstream might utilise a similarly fluorescent dye in place of (or
alongside) curcumin, accumulation of the NPs in different tissue
could require a different solution. Manual biopsy and processing of
tissue might be effective to determine concentrations in specific
organs and obvious tumour tissue, but it may be less effective if the
NPs/drugs are accumulating in other tissue like fat. Whole body
fluorescence imaging has been used in mouse models to image
distribution patterns of NP accumulation and could be used to
determine whether NPs are accumulating in expected (or
unexpected) locations in the body [41, 42].
Though research into NP-based solutions for drug delivery are
becoming more popular, the field is still relatively new, and
markets have not seen much widespread adoption of these
technologies. It is hoped that this project will serve as a significant
step towards the scalability and modularity that will enable the
wider applicability and production of nanocarriers to enhance drug
delivery and effectiveness. While this project focused on anti-cancer
applications, there are numerous other potential areas of use,

including anti-bacterial/anti-fungal agents, or delivery to areas of
the body with otherwise low accumulation such as the past the
blood-brain-barrier. Further optimization will be required to
improve properties such as peptide binding; there may also be
avenues to explore such as the use of click chemistry in chemical
binding, as well as other polymers suited for applications like anti-
bacterial activity.
Statements
Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made
available by the authors, without undue reservation.
Author contributions
CW designed the study and performed data collection and analysis
under the supervision of EH. CW wrote the manuscript, with
supervision and revisions by EH. All authors contributed to the
article and approved the submitted version.
Funding
The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Blossom Yan for her assistance with
collection of 1H NMR spectroscopy data, as well as Jin Wang and
Sihan Dong for their consultation regarding effective cell culturing
practices. The authors also thank Dr. Praveen R. P. Nekkar and Dr.
Scott Taylor for their various insights and discussions throughout
the study. This article in part, is based on the master’s thesis of first
author CW [43].
Conflict of interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed
as a potential conflict of interest.
References
•  1.
Sung H Ferlay J Siegel RL Laversanne M Soerjomataram I
Jemal A et al Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN
estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36
cancers in 185 countries. CA: A Cancer J Clinicians (2021)
71(3):209–49. 10.3322/caac.21660
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  2.
Brenner DR Poirier A Woods RR Ellison LF Billette JM Demers
AA et al Projected estimates of cancer in Canada in 2022. Can
Med Assoc J (2022) 194(17):E601–7. 10.1503/cmaj.212097
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  3.
Liang XJ Chen C Zhao Y Wang PC . Circumventing tumor
resistance to chemotherapy by nanotechnology. In: ZhouJ,
editor. Multi-drug resistance in cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana
Press (2010). p. 467–88. 10.1007/978-1-60761-416-6_21
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  4.
Kennealey GT Mitchell MS . Factors that influence the
therapeutic response. In: BeckerFF, editor. Chemotherapy.
Boston, MA: Springer US (1977). p. 3–27.

10.1007/978-1-4615-6628-1_1
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  5.
Shaw MT Stebbins RD . Adjunctive chemotherapy. In:
BeckerFF, editor. Chemotherapy. Boston, MA: Springer US
(1977). p. 145–62. 10.1007/978-1-4615-6628-1_5
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  6.
Cadman E . Toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents. In:
BeckerFF, editor. Chemotherapy. Boston, MA: Springer US
(1977). p. 59–111. 10.1007/978-1-4615-6628-1_3
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  7.
Chidambaram M Manavalan R Kathiresan K .
Nanotherapeutics to overcome conventional cancer
chemotherapy limitations. J Pharm Pharm Sci (2011)
14(1):67. 10.18433/j30c7d
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  8.
O’Toole MG Soucy PA Chauhan R Raju MVR Patel DN Nunn
BM et al Release-modulated antioxidant activity of a
composite curcumin-chitosan polymer. Biomacromolecules
(2016) 17(4):1253–60. 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b01019
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar

•  9.
Shi W Dolai S Rizk S Hussain A Tariq H Averick S et al
Synthesis of monofunctional curcumin derivatives, clicked
curcumin dimer, and a PAMAM dendrimer curcumin
conjugate for therapeutic applications. Org Lett (2007)
9(26):5461–4. 10.1021/ol702370m
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  10.
Hales D Tefas LR Tomuță I Moldovan C Gulei D Munteanu R
et al Development of a curcumin-loaded polymeric
microparticulate oral drug delivery system for colon targeting
by quality-by-design approach. Pharmaceutics (2020)
12(11):1027. 10.3390/pharmaceutics12111027
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  11.
Chen J Dai WT He ZM Gao L Huang X Gong JM et al
Fabrication and evaluation of curcumin-loaded nanoparticles
based on solid lipid as a new type of colloidal drug delivery
system. Indian J Pharm Sci (2013) 75(2):178–84.
○  Google Scholar
•  12.
Anand P Sundaram C Jhurani S Kunnumakkara AB Aggarwal
BB . Curcumin and cancer: an “old-age” disease with an “age-
old” solution. Cancer Lett (2008) 267(1):133–64. 10.1016/
j.canlet.2008.03.025
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  13.

Naves L Dhand C Almeida L Rajamani L Ramakrishna S
Soares G . Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid drug delivery systems
through transdermal pathway: an overview. Prog Biomater
(2017) 6:1–11. 10.1007/s40204-017-0063-0
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  14.
Alexis F Pridgen E Molnar LK Farokhzad OC . Factors
affecting the clearance and biodistribution of polymeric
nanoparticles. Mol Pharmaceutics (2008) 5(4):505–15.
10.1021/mp800051m
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  15.
Ding S Anton N Vandamme TF Serra CA . Microfluidic
nanoprecipitation systems for preparing pure drug or
polymeric drug loaded nanoparticles: an overview. Expert
Opin Drug Deliv (2016) 13(10):1447–60.
10.1080/17425247.2016.1193151
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  16.
Eley JG Pujari VD McLane J . Poly (Lactide-co-Glycolide)
nanoparticles containing coumarin-6 for suppository delivery:
in vitro release profile and in vivo tissue distribution. Drug
Deliv (2004) 11(4):255–61. 10.1080/10717540490467384
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  17.
McCall RL Sirianni RW . PLGA nanoparticles formed by

single- or double-emulsion with vitamin E-TPGS. J visualized
experiments : JoVE (2013) 82:e51015. 10.3791/51015
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  18.
Sedki M Khalil IA El-Sherbiny IM . Hybrid nanocarrier system
for guiding and augmenting simvastatin cytotoxic activity
against prostate cancer. Artif Cell Nanomedicine, Biotechnol
(2018) 46(Suppl. 3):S641–50.
10.1080/21691401.2018.1505743
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  19.
Sutar YB Telvekar VN . Chitosan based copolymer-drug
conjugate and its protein targeted polyelectrolyte complex
nanoparticles to enhance the efficiency and specificity of low
potency anticancer agent. Mater Sci Eng C (2018) 92:393–406.
10.1016/j.msec.2018.07.001
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  20.
Xia W Liu P Zhang J Chen J . Biological activities of chitosan
and chitooligosaccharides. Food Hydrocolloids (2011)
25(2):170–9. 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2010.03.003
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  21.
Dong W Wang X Liu C Zhang X Zhang X Chen X et al
Chitosan based polymer-lipid hybrid nanoparticles for oral
delivery of enoxaparin. Int J Pharmaceutics (2018)

547(1):499–505. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2018.05.076
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  22.
Ryu JH Yoon HY Sun IC Kwon IC Kim K . Tumor-targeting
glycol chitosan nanoparticles for cancer heterogeneity. Adv
Mater (2020) 32(51):2002197. 10.1002/adma.202002197
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  23.
Mazzarino L Otsuka I Halila S Bubniak Ld S Mazzucco S
Santos-Silva MC et al Xyloglucan-block-Poly(ϵ-Caprolactone)
copolymer nanoparticles coated with chitosan as
biocompatible mucoadhesive drug delivery system.
Macromolecular Biosci (2014) 14(5):709–19. 10.1002/
mabi.201300465
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  24.
Moussa A Crépet A Ladavière C Trombotto S . Reducing-end
“clickable” functionalizations of chitosan oligomers for the
synthesis of chitosan-based diblock copolymers. Carbohydr
Polym (2019) 219:387–94. 10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.078
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  25.
Allan GG Peyron M . Molecular weight manipulation of
chitosan I: kinetics of depolymerization by nitrous acid.
Carbohydr Res (1995) 277(2):257–72.
10.1016/0008-6215(95)00207-a

○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  26.
Moussa A Trombotto S . Octanoic hydrazide-linked
chitooligosaccharides-2,5-anhydro-d-mannofuranose. Molbank
(2016) 2016(3):M904. 10.3390/m904
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  27.
Xing Y Zhu L Zhang K Li T Huang S . Nanodelivery of
triamcinolone acetonide with PLGA-chitosan nanoparticles for
the treatment of ocular inflammation. Artif Cell Nanomedicine,
Biotechnol (2021) 49(1):308–16.
10.1080/21691401.2021.1895184
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  28.
Wang Y Li P Kong L . Chitosan-modified PLGA nanoparticles
with versatile surface for improved drug delivery. AAPS
PharmSciTech (2013) 14(2):585–92. 10.1208/
s12249-013-9943-3
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  29.
Thermo Fisher Scientific. Amine-reactive crosslinker chemistry
(2021). Available from: https://www.thermofisher.com/ca/
en/home/life-science/protein-biology/protein-biology-
learning-center/protein-biology-resource-library/pierce-
protein-methods/amine-reactive-crosslinker-chemistry.html
(Accessed September 24, 2021).

○  Google Scholar
•  30.
Thermo Fisher Scientific. Carbodiimide crosslinker chemistry
(2022). Available from: https://www.thermofisher.com/ca/
en/home/life-science/protein-biology/protein-biology-
learning-center/protein-biology-resource-library/pierce-
protein-methods/carbodiimide-crosslinker-chemistry.html
(Accessed October 5, 2022).
○  Google Scholar
•  31.
Liu Z Wang F Chen X . Integrin αvβ3-targeted cancer therapy.
Drug Dev Res (2008) 69(6):329–39. 10.1002/ddr.20265
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  32.
Schottelius M Laufer B Kessler H Wester HJ . Ligands for
mapping αvβ3-integrin expression in vivo. Acc Chem Res
(2009) 42(7):969–80. 10.1021/ar800243b
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  33.
Tan H Huang D Lao L Gao C . RGD modified PLGA/gelatin
microspheres as microcarriers for chondrocyte delivery. J
Biomed Mater Res B: Appl Biomater (2009) 91B(1):228–38.
10.1002/jbm.b.31394
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  34.

Xiong XB Ma Z Lai R Lavasanifar A . The therapeutic response
to multifunctional polymeric nano-conjugates in the targeted
cellular and subcellular delivery of doxorubicin. Biomaterials
(2010) 31(4):757–68. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.09.080
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  35.
Xiong XB Mahmud A Uludağ H Lavasanifar A .
Multifunctional polymeric micelles for enhanced intracellular
delivery of doxorubicin to metastatic cancer cells. Pharm Res
(2008) 25(11):2555–66. 10.1007/s11095-008-9673-5
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  36.
Rafiei P Haddadi A . Docetaxel-loaded PLGA and PLGA-PEG
nanoparticles for intravenous application: pharmacokinetics
and biodistribution profile. Int J Nanomedicine (2017) 12:935–
47. 10.2147/ijn.s121881
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  37.
Dijkgraaf I Kruijtzer JAW Frielink C Corstens FHM Oyen WJG
Liskamp RMJ et al αvβ3 Integrin‐targeting of intraperitoneally
growing tumors with a radiolabeled RGD peptide. Int J Cancer
(2006) 120(3):605–10. 10.1002/ijc.22297
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  38.
Khalil N Nascimento TCF Casa DM Dalmolin LF Mattos AC
Hoss I et al Pharmacokinetics of curcumin-loaded PLGA and

PLGA–PEG blend nanoparticles after oral administration in
rats. Colloids Surf B: Biointerfaces (2013) 101:353–60.
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.06.024
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  39.
Gao M Long X Du J Teng M Zhang W Wang Y et al Enhanced
curcumin solubility and antibacterial activity by
encapsulation in PLGA oily core nanocapsules. Food Funct
(2020) 11(1):448–55. 10.1039/c9fo00901a
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  40.
Zhang Z Tongchusak S Mizukami Y Kang YJ Ioji T Touma M
et al Induction of anti-tumor cytotoxic T cell responses
through PLGA-nanoparticle mediated antigen delivery.
Biomaterials (2011) 32(14):3666–78. 10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2011.01.067
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  41.
Meng F Wang J Ping Q Yeo Y . Quantitative assessment of
nanoparticle biodistribution by fluorescence imaging,
revisited. ACS Nano (2018) 12(7):6458–68. 10.1021/
acsnano.8b02881
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  42.
Leblond F Davis SC Valdés PA Pogue BW . Preclinical whole-
body fluorescence imaging: review of instruments, methods

and applications. J Photochem Photobiol B: Biol (2010)
98(1):77–94. 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2009.11.007
○  CrossRef
○  Google Scholar
•  43.
Wong C . Development of modular polymeric NPs for drug
delivery using amine-reactive chemistry. Master's Thesis.
Waterloo, Canada: University of Waterloo (2024). Available
from: http://hdl.handle.net/10012/20307 (Accessed January
24, 2024).
○  Google Scholar
Summary
Keywords
nanoparticles, curcumin, cancer, drug delivery systems, PLGA
Citation
Wong C and Ho EA (2024) Development of modular polymeric
nanoparticles for drug delivery using amine reactive chemistry. J.
Pharm. Pharm. Sci 27:13148. doi: 10.3389/jpps.2024.13148
Received
17 April 2024
Accepted
25 July 2024
Published
06 August 2024
Volume

27 - 2024
Edited by
Fakhreddin Jamali, University of Alberta, Canada
Updates
[image]
Check for updates
Copyright
© 2024 Wong and Ho.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and
that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
*Correspondence: Emmanuel A. Ho, emmanuel.ho@uwaterloo.ca
Disclaimer
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.

 Article metrics

1
Citations
1,5k
Views
714
Downloads

Download
PDF

Download other formats

•
ReadCube

•
EPUB

•
XML

Cite articleShare article
•

PDF

Download other format

○
ReadCube

○
EPUB

○
XML

•
Outline

•
Figures

•
Cite

•
Share

•
More

 Outline

 Figures

 Cite article

Copy to clipboard
Copy citation
Export citation file
•  BibTex
•  EndNote
•  Reference Manager
•  Simple Text file

 Share article

•
Facebook

•
X

•
LinkedIn

•
Email

•
WeChat
Share on WeChat
Scan with WeChat to share this article
•  Explore
○  About Frontiers Publishing Partnerships
○  About Frontiers
•  Connect
○  Submit
○  Help center
© 2025 Frontiers Media S.A. All Rights Reserved
Privacy policy | Terms and conditions