Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
Preparation of insulin-loaded PLA/PLGA microcapsules by a novel
membrane emulsiﬁcation method and its release in vitro
Rong Liu a, Shan-Shan Huang a,b, Yin-Hua Wan a, Guang-Hui Ma a,∗, Zhi-Guo Su a
a State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China
b School of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China
Received 13 December 2005; received in revised form 4 May 2006; accepted 21 May 2006
Available online 25 May 2006
Abstract
Uniform-sized biodegradable PLA/PLGA microcapsules loading recombinant human insulin (rhI) were successfully prepared by combining a
Shirasu Porous Glass (SPG) membrane emulsiﬁcation technique and a double emulsion-evaporation method. An aqueous phase containing rhI
was used as the inner water phase (w1), and PLA/PLGA and Arlacel 83 were dissolved in a mixture solvent of dichloromethane (DCM) and
toluene, which was used as the oil phase (o). These two solutions were emulsiﬁed by a homogenizer to form a w1/o primary emulsion. The
primary emulsion was permeated through the uniform pores of a SPG membrane into an outer water phase by the pressure of nitrogen gas to form
the uniform w1/o/w2 droplets. The solid polymer microcapsules were obtained by simply evaporating solvent from droplets. Various factors of
the preparation process inﬂuencing the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and the drug cumulative release were investigated systemically. The results
indicated that the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and the cumulative release were affected by the PLA/PLGA ratio, NaCl concentration in outer
water phase, the inner water phase volume, rhI-loading amount, pH-value in outer water phase and the size of microcapsules. By optimizing the
preparation process, the drug encapsulation efﬁciency was high up to 91.82%. The unique advantage of preparing drug-loaded microcapsules by
membrane emulsiﬁcation technique is that the size of microcapsules can be controlled accurately, and thus the drug cumulative release proﬁle can
be adjusted just by changing the size of microcapsules. Moreover, much higher encapsulation efﬁciency can be obtained when compared with the
conventional mechanical stirring method.
© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: SPG membrane emulsiﬁcation; Double emulsion-solvent evaporation; Poly(lactide); Encapsulation efﬁciency
1. Introduction
Parenteral administration of insulin formulations has been the
primary therapy utilized for the treatment of insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (IDDM) since insulin’s discovery over 75 years
ago [1]. Nevertheless, due to its poor oral bioavailability and
short elimination half-life, patients always suffer from frequent
injections daily. It is obvious that patient compliance and thera-
peutic effectiveness can be improved greatly if insulin could be
released in a controlled fashion for longer periods. In order to
achieve this purpose, encapsulation of insulin within microcap-
sules for drug delivery system, using biodegradable polymers,
has been studied extensively over recent years [2–5]. Among
different polymers, poly(dl-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 1082627072; fax: +86 1082627072.
E-mail address: ghma@home.ipe.ac.cn (G.-H. Ma).
copolymers and poly(dl-lactic acid) (PLA) have been exten-
sively used as microparticle carriers in controlled-release deliv-
ery systems for many bioactive molecules due to their non-toxic,
good bioavailability and biocompatibility, and approval by the
Food and Drug Administration for human use [6].
Until now, various techniques are available to entrap water-
soluble bioactive agents into biodegradable microcapsules,
including double emulsion, organic phase separation, super-
critical ﬂuid and spray drying techniques [7,8]. Among them,
the w1/o/w2 double emulsion-evaporation technique is the most
commonly used method, which was patented by Vrancken and
Claeys [9] in USA in 1970 and by Jaeger and Tavernier [10] in
UKin1971,thendevelopedbyOgawaetal.[11].However,inthe
conventional process, the double emulsions are usually prepared
by the mechanical stirring, homogenization or ultrasonication
method, the size is difﬁcult to control, and the size distribution
of microcapsules obtained is very broad, which will lead to many
disadvantages, such as: (1) lower bioavailability of drug-loaded
0927-7765/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.colsurfb.2006.05.014

R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
31
microcapsules in vivo because only the microcapsules within a
certain size range can be absorbed [12]; (2) difﬁculty to control
drugs’ release behavior precisely; (3) lower drug encapsulation
efﬁciency; (4) poor reproducibility. Furthermore, the microcap-
sules with a narrow size distribution are necessary in the drug
delivery system in order to decrease side effects of the drugs,
especially anti-cancer agents, because the accumulated locations
of the microcapsules containing anti-cancer agents also depend
on the size of the microcapsules [13]. Therefore, it is very impor-
tant to develop a method, which can provide the uniform-sized
microcapsules composed of biodegradable polymers.
To obtain microspheres or microcapsules with narrow size
distribution, we found that the SPG (Shirasu Porous Glass)
membrane emulsiﬁcation technique is a promising technique. In
addition to narrow size distribution, SPG membrane emulsiﬁca-
tion technique, when used to prepare PLA microcapsules, also
offers following advantages: (1) the diameter of double emul-
sion and resultant microcapsules can be controlled easily by
adopting the required pore size of the membrane; (2) break-up
and coalescence between droplets rarely occur during the emul-
siﬁcation and solidiﬁcation processes due to the narrow size
distribution of the droplets, therefore, the drug will not escape
out of the droplet by coalescence and break-up of the droplets,
a much higher encapsulation efﬁciency can be expected; (3)
emulsiﬁcation is carried out with low shear, it is suitable
for the encapsulation of shear-sensitive protein and peptide
drugs.
In a previous study [14,15], we have ﬁrst prepared uniform-
sized PLA microcapsules by combining the novel glass mem-
brane emulsiﬁcation technique and double emulsion-solvent
evaporation method, where we have solved the difﬁculty that
the w1/o primary emulsion was unstable during the emulsiﬁ-
cation process, and investigated the factors inﬂuencing the size
distribution of microcapsules. However, the factors affecting the
drug cumulative release proﬁle have never been studied system-
ically when PLA/PLGA was used as the delivery biomaterials
and the drug-loaded microcapsules were prepared by the novel
membrane emulsiﬁcation technique.
In this study, the primary objective was to prepare uniform-
sized protein-loaded PLA/PLGA microcapsules by combining a
glass membrane emulsiﬁcation technique and double emulsion-
solvent evaporation method, using recombinant human insulin
(rhI) as the model protein, and to realize a higher drug encap-
sulation efﬁciency. The second aim of this study was to investi-
gate factors inﬂuencing the drug cumulative release proﬁles in
vitro. Three mechanisms for controlling drug release from these
polymer matrices have been conﬁrmed [16]: Fickian diffusion
through the polymer matrix; diffusion through water-ﬁlled pores
(aqueous channels) formed by water penetration into the matrix
and liberation by erosion of the polymer matrix. The actual
release behavior from the polymer matrices has to be controlled
by a combination of these three mechanisms and is affected by
factors such as the copolymer composition, the NaCl concentra-
tion in outer water phase, the inner water phase volume, the drug
loading amount, the pH-value in outer water phase, the micro-
capsules size, and all of these factors will be discussed in detail
in the following sections.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
PLA (Mw = 300K) and PLGA (L/G ratio = 75:25, Mw = 8K)
were purchased from Shandong Institute of Medical Instrument
(Sandong, China). Recombinant human insulin (rhI) was pro-
vided by Gan&Lee Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China).
Sorbitan Sesquioleate (Arlacel 83) of biochemical grade was
purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, USA) and used as an emul-
siﬁer in oil phase. Acetic acid, dichloromethane (DCM) and
toluene of analytical grade were purchased from Beijing Chem-
ical Reagents Company (Beijing, China). Poly(vinyl alcohol)
(PVA-217, degree of polymerization 1700, degree of hydrolysis
88.5%) was provided by Kuraray (Tokyo, Japan) and was used
as a stabilizer in outer water phase. All other reagents were of
reagent grade and used as received.
2.2. Apparatus
A miniature kit for emulsiﬁcation with an MPG mod-
ule (Microporous Glass, a brand name of the glass mem-
brane) installed was purchased from Ise Chemical Company.
A schematic diagram of this kit and the detailed emulsiﬁcation
process were given in a previous paper [15]. Membranes with
pore size of 1.4, 2.8, 5.2 m were used in this study, respectively.
2.3. Preparation of PLA/PLGA microcapsules
The PLA/PLGA microcapsules were prepared by combin-
ing a membrane emulsiﬁcation technique and w1/o/w2 double
emulsion-solventevaporationmethoddescribedpreviously[15].
A standard recipe is shown in Table 1. Unless speciﬁed, 2.5, 5.0,
7.5 or 10.0 mg of rhI was dissolved in 250 l of 1.0 wt.% acetic
acid (pH 2.8) and was used as the inner water phase (w1). 0.125 g
PLA, 0.125 g PLGA and 0.25 wt.% Arlacel 83 were dissolved in
a 2.5 ml mixture solvent of DCM and toluene, which was used as
the oil phase (o). These two solutions were mixed and emulsiﬁed
by a homogenizer at a rate of 9800 rpm for 50 s to form a w1/o
primary emulsion. The 70 ml of aqueous phase where 0.7 g of
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) was dissolved was used as the outer
Table 1
Standard recipe in the preparation of microcapsules
Phase/ingredient
Amount
Inner water phase (w1)
1.0 wt.% acetate acid (pH 2.8)
250 l
rhI
2.5, 5.0, 7.5 or 1.0 mg
Oil phase (o)
Mixed solvent (DCM + toluene)
2.5 ml (DCM/toluene (v/v): 21/79)
Oil-soluble emulsiﬁer (Arlacel 83)
6.25 mg
PLA/PLGA
0.125 g/0.125 g
Outer water phase (w2)
Water
70 ml
PVA
0.7 g
Sodium chloride
0–5.0 (maximum 5.0 wt.% of water)

32
R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
water phase (w2). The primary emulsion was permeated through
the uniform pores of a SPG membrane (pore size: 2.8 m) into
the outer water phase by the pressure of nitrogen gas to form
the uniform-sized droplets. Then, DCM and toluene were evap-
orated at room temperature for 24 h under a gentle stirring at a
rate of 150 rpm. A pressure slightly above the critical pressure,
which is deﬁned as a minimum pressure at which the primary
emulsion begins to permeate through the membrane into the
outer water phase, was applied. After DCM and toluene were
evaporated under vacuum, the hardened PLA/PLGA microcap-
sules were collected by centrifugation and washed with distilled
water three times, and then freeze-dried for 48 h. After above
puriﬁcation process, no toluene was detected by gas chromatog-
raphy. The procedure for preparing microcapsules by the stirring
method was similar with the process mentioned above except
that the w1/o/w2 double emulsion droplets were yielded by stir-
ring method at a rate of 1000 rpm for 40 s.
2.4. SEM observation of microcapsules
The diameter and surface morphology of PLA/PLGA micro-
capsules were observed by a JSM-6700F (JEOL, Japan) scan-
ningelectronmicroscope(SEM).ThespecimensforSEMobser-
vation were prepared by mounting sample on metal stubs with
double-sided conductive adhesive tape and coating a thin gold
ﬁlm (approximately 60 nm in thickness) on sample under a
reduced pressure below 5 Pa with a JFC-1600 ﬁne coater (JEOL,
Japan).
2.5. Determination of microcapsules size and size
distribution
The dried PLA/PLGA microcapsules were redisperesed in
distilled water and then measured by a Coulter Multisizer (Coul-
ter LS230, USA). The particle size distribution was expressed
by a CV (coefﬁcient of variation) value, which is deﬁned as:
CV =
 (di−¯d)2
N
1/2
¯d
where di is the ith diameter, ¯d is the number-average diameter,
and N is the total number of particles counted.
2.6. Measurement of the drug encapsulation efﬁciency
Total amount of rhI loaded was measured using Peterson-
Lowry method [17], after disruption of the microcapsules with
2.0% SDS/0.1 M NaOH solution. Sodium hydroxide catalyzed
the hydrolysis of PLA/PLGA, while SDS ensured the complete
solubilization of rhI during polymer hydrolysis. The resulting
solution was then neutralized by stepwise addition of 1 M HCl.
The encapsulation efﬁciency was calculated from the following
formula:
Encapsulation efﬁciency (%)
= Total amount of rhI loaded
Total amount of rhI
× 100
2.7. In vitro protein release studies
Twenty milligrams of freeze-dried microcapsules, accurately
weighted, were placed in a test tube and incubated in 1.5 ml
of PBS buffer, pH 7.4 (8 g NaCl, 0.2 g KCl, 0.24 g KH2PO4,
1.81 g Na2HPO4·H2O, 0.5 g NaN3, 0.1 g Tween 20 and 1000 ml
distilled water). The samples were agitated in a 37 ◦C incubator-
shaker at 120 rpm. At deﬁned time intervals, 1.0 ml of super-
natant was collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 5 min
and 1.0 ml of fresh PBS buffer was added back. The amount of
rhI released was determined by measuring protein concentration
in the supernatant using Peterson-Lowry method. Each sample
was assayed in triplicate.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Surface morphology of microcapsules and its size
distribution
The surface morphology of the typical PLA/PLGA micro-
capsules containing rhI was observed by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), and is shown in Fig. 1a. At the optimized
Fig. 1. SEM photos of the original PLA/PLGA microcapsules (a) and the degraded PLA/PLGA microcapsules (b) prepared by SPG membrane emulsiﬁcation.

R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
33
condition, all of the microcapsules were spherical in shape with
a smooth surface, and its size distribution was rather narrow, the
CV value was less than 14.0%. The change of some conditions
may not affect the morphology of microcapsules, but had some
inﬂuence on the size distribution, which will be discussed in
detail in the following sections. Fig. 1b shows the SEM photo-
graph of microcapsules after it was incubated in 1.5 ml of release
medium for about 1 month. It indicated that the microcapsules
were degraded into those with pores, which is favorable for the
release of drugs encapsulated.
3.2. Effect of PLA/PLGA ratio
PLA and PLGA are the most investigated and advanced poly-
mers with regard to available toxicological and clinical data.
PLA and PLGA are non-toxic, biocompatible and biodegrad-
able polymers approved by the Food and Drug Administration
for human use. Here, due to the slow degradation rate of PLA,
PLGA with lower molecular weight was added to increase the
cumulative release rate of drugs encapsulated, and the effect
of PLA/PLGA ratio on both drug encapsulation efﬁciency and
cumulative release proﬁle was investigated. The total amount of
PLA and PLGA was 0.25 g. As shown in Fig. 2, the highest drug
encapsulation efﬁciency was obtained when the PLA/PLGA
ratio was equal to 1/1, and subsequently decreased with the
increase of PLA or PLGA proportion, respectively. This may
be related to the characteristics of PLA and PLGA. Because
phase-separation between PLA and PLGA was easy to occur, it
tended to form microcapsules with double-layer structure, in
which PLGA formed the inner-layer wall which faced inner
water phase and PLA formed the outer-layer wall [18]. As
PLGA is more hydrophilic than PLA, hydrophilic drugs tended
to locate in the inner-layer PLGA phase, while the outer-layer
PLA phase formed a hydrophobic wall to retard the leakage
of drugs, thus the drug encapsulation efﬁciency was enhanced.
When the PLA/PLGA ratio was lower than 1/1, the PLGA inner-
layer was thicker, and the distance between the drug located in
inner-layer phase and the surface of microcapsules was short-
ened, which induced the leakage of the drugs into the outer
water phase and led to the decrease of drug encapsulation efﬁ-
Fig. 2. Effect of PLA/PLGA ratio on the drug encapsulation efﬁciency.
Fig. 3. Effect of PLA/PLGA ratio on the drug cumulative release proﬁle.
ciency. Interestingly, that when the PLA/PLGA ratio was higher
than 1/1, the drug encapsulation efﬁciency was also decreased.
The reason is still unclear. Usually, there are three main factors
which are considered to affect the drug encapsulation efﬁciency
during emulsiﬁcation and solidiﬁcation of double emulsion: (1)
coalescence between inner water phase and outer water phase,
leading to the leakage of the drug into the outer water phase.
Therefore, the more stable the inner water phase, the higher
drug encapsulation efﬁciency; (2) coalescence and break-up
of double emulsions, also leading to the leakage of drug; (3)
diffusion of drug from inner to outer water phase through oil
phase. In the process of membrane emulsiﬁcation, the probabil-
ity for coalescence and break-up of the double emulsions was
little because of their uniform size and stability. Therefore, the
reason for the decrease of drug encapsulation efﬁciency with
increase of PLA/PLGA ratio was mainly attributed to the coa-
lescence between inner water phase and outer water phase. This
was because the w1/o primary emulsion became less stable with
PLA/PLGA increased.
The release proﬁles of the microcapsules prepared with dif-
ferent PLA/PLGA ratio are shown in Fig. 3. The human insulin
release proﬁles were biphasic, showing an initial burst followed
by nearly a constant release. It was demonstrated that with the
increase of PLGA proportion, the human insulin encapsulated
released more rapidly with a higher burst release, mostly due to
the rapid degradation of PLGA.
3.3. Effect of NaCl concentration in outer water phase
In the process of preparing microcapsules by double
emulsion-solvent evaporation method, NaCl was usually added
into the outer water phase to adjust the osmotic pressure dif-
ference between the inner and outer water phases of w/o/w
emulsion. This different osmotic pressure affects microcapsules
formation, the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and the cumula-
tive release proﬁle. As shown in Fig. 4, the rhI encapsulation
efﬁciency increased from 65.61% to 92.21% when NaCl con-
centration in outer water phase increased from 0 to 5.0 wt.%.
This trend was similar to the results obtained by Meng et al.
[19] on encapsulation of lysozyme. When the osmotic pressure
of the outer water phase is greater than that of the inner water

34
R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
Fig. 4. Effect of NaCl concentration in outer water phase on the drug encapsu-
lation efﬁciency.
phase, there would be an inﬂux of water from inner water phase,
asaresult,themicrocapsulesaredenserandhavesmallerparticle
sizes. This in turn depresses the drug’s leakage and is considered
to be favorable for the enhancement of the drug encapsulation
efﬁciency. Fig. 5 shows the SEM photographs of the microcap-
sules with different NaCl concentration in outer water phase.
As can be seen, the mean size of microcapsules decreased with
increasing NaCl concentration in outer water phase. The results
agree well with above discussion.
Due to the inﬂuence of the osmotic pressure, NaCl concentra-
tion in outer water phase also affects the rhI cumulative release
proﬁle. As shown in Fig. 6, the initial release on the ﬁrst day
decreased from 34.43% to 6.33% when NaCl concentration
increased from 0 to 5.0 wt.%. It was obvious that the initial
release was depressed when NaCl concentration in outer water
phase was higher. When NaCl concentration in outer water phase
was lower, it was easier for the drugs to diffuse to the surface
of microcapsules, thus leading to the faster “burst effect”. In
addition, it was found that the release rate was similar after the
“burst effect”. This suggested that the phenomenon was mainly
due to the release of drugs located near the surface of micro-
capsules. Therefore, it is necessary to adjust osmotic pressure of
outer water phase according to the amount of drug in the inner
water phase in order to prepare microcapsules with high drug
encapsulation efﬁciency and lower initial release by membrane
emulsiﬁcation technique.
3.4. Effect of the inner water phase volume
To investigate its inﬂuence on the drug encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency and cumulative release proﬁle, the volume of oil phase
was kept at 2.5 ml, while the inner water phase volume was
changed. The results are shown in Table 2. When the inner-
water phase volume increased from 250 to 625 l, the drug
encapsulation efﬁciency decreased sharply from 65.61% to
14.19%, whereas and the initial release increased from 34.43%
to 46.54%, respectively. Furthermore, it was found that rhI
cumulative release was faster after the initial release when the
volume of inner water phase increased (see Fig. 7). As described,
in the preparation of drug-loaded microcapsules, the loss of drug
Table 2
Effect of the inner water phase volume on the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and
initial release
Inner water phase
volume (l)
Encapsulation
efﬁciency (%)
Initial rhI bursta (%)
250
65.61
34.43
375
47.88
41.96
500
35.82
46.11
625
14.19
46.54
a rhI released during the ﬁrst 24 h.
encapsulated was mainly ascribed to the coalescence between
inner water phase and outer water phase during the double emul-
sion formation and the solvent removal process. Increasing the
inner water phase in the primary w1/o emulsion led to higher
probability of coalescence between inner water phase and outer
waterphaseandthusinducingthedecreaseofdrugencapsulation
efﬁciency. Moreover, increasing the volume of inner water phase
also increased the number of internal cave volume of micro-
capsules, the distance between the drug encapsulated and the
surfaceofmicrocapsuleswasshortened,andthedrugcumulative
release was fastened. In addition, from Fig. 8, it was obvious that
increasing the volume of inner water phase led to the formation
of a few larger microcapsules. This implied that the coalescence
and break-up between the droplets occurred more frequently
during the membrane emulsiﬁcation and solidiﬁcation process
when a large volume of inner water phase was used. Therefore,
the drugs escaped out of the droplets easily, and the drug encap-
sulation efﬁciency was decreased.
3.5. Effect of rhI-loading amount
Drug loading amount is a key factor inﬂuencing not only
the drug encapsulation efﬁciency, but also the drug cumulative
release proﬁles. In the process of membrane emulsiﬁcation, we
found an interesting phenomena that the primary emulsion can
not be pressed through the membrane pores successfully, i.e.,
the membrane pore was jammed, if the drug loading exceeded a
certain amount when only PLA was used as the wall biomaterial,
and the concentration of Arlacel 83 (oil-soluble emulsiﬁer) was
below 1.0 wt.%. It was found that various drugs had different
limited amount, as listed in Table 3. Above the limited amount,
the primary emulsion cannot be pressed through the membrane
pores at the condition mentioned above. However, when PLGA
was mixed with PLA, this phenomena disappeared, and the pri-
mary emulsion can be pressed through the membrane pores even
whentheconcentrationofArlacel83wasdecreasedto0.25 wt.%
and the drug loading amount can be increased to several times
than the limited amount. The reason was probably because the
Table 3
The limited loading amount for various proteins
Proteins
Limited amount (mg/ml)
Lysozyme
1.0
BSA
<1.0
rhI
5.0

R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
35
Fig. 5. SEM photos of the PLA/PLGA microcapsules with different NaCl concentration in outer water phase: (a) 0 wt.%; (b) 0.5 wt.%; (c) 1.0 wt.%; (d) 2.5 wt.%;
(e) 5.0 wt.%.
adding of drug caused the unstability of primary emulsion when
only PLA was used, the droplets of primary emulsion coalesced
to larger droplets, which can not pass through the pores of the
membrane. On the other hand, PLGA was relatively hydrophilic,
the primary emulsion was more stable due to the decrease of
interfacial tension. Therefore, the coalescence between droplets
of primary emulsion was prevented efﬁciently.
The effect of rhI-loading amount on the encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency and initial release is listed in Table 4. The results showed
thatwhenrhI-loadingamountincreasedfrom1.0to4.0 wt.%,the
drug encapsulation decreased obviously from 86.93% to 43.89%
and the initial release increased from 3.18% to 44.41%, respec-
tively. A higher rhI-loading amount means higher rhI concen-
tration in the inner water phase of the double emulsion droplets,
which increased the concentration gradient of rhI between the
inner and outer water phase, thus increasing the amount of rhI
diffusing into the outer water phase and its accumulation near
the surface of microcapsules.
Fig. 9 shows that the cumulative release proﬁles was also
related to the rhI-loading amount. At higher loading amount, rhI
followed a slow and pseudo-linear release after a larger initial
burst. However, at lower loading amount, rhI released little by

36
R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
Fig. 6. Effect of NaCl concentration in outer water phase on the drug cumulative
release proﬁle.
Table 4
Effect of rhI-loading amount on the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and initial
release
rhI-loading
amount (mg)
Encapsulation
efﬁciency (%)
Initial rhI
bursta (%)
2.5
86.93
3.18
5.0
72.71
7.12
7.5
65.61
34.43
10.0
43.89
44.41
a rhI released during the ﬁrst 24 h.
Fig. 7. Effect of the inner water phase volume on the drug cumulative release
proﬁle.
little and increased as a function of time following a smaller ini-
tial burst. The difference in release rate is due to the fact that there
is a larger rhI concentration gradient between the microcapsules
and the outer water phase when the rhI-loading amount is higher.
Since the gradient is the driving force for rhI diffusion, 4.0 wt.%
(10.0 mg of rhI) loading led to a higher initial burst and a more
rapid release rate. Moreover, at a higher actual loading level,
there was more rhI distributed near the surface area of micro-
capsules. This led to a greater initial release. As the rhI released,
it left more pores and interconnecting channels for the release of
Fig. 8. SEM photos of the PLA/PLGA microcapsules with different inner water phase volume: (a) 250 l; (b) 375 l; (c) 500 l; (d) 675 l.

R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
37
Fig. 9. Effect of the rhI-loading amount on the drug cumulative release proﬁle.
the remaining rhI. However, rhI has to travel a longer path under
a lower concentration gradient. Therefore, the release rate of rhI
from the microcapsules decreased at the later stage, as shown in
Fig. 9. These results suggested that drug-loading amount should
be taken into consideration when trying to achieve a desired
release proﬁle.
3.6. Effect of pH-value in outer water phase
pH-value in outer water phase has been considered to be
an important factor inﬂuencing the drug encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency and cumulative release. As shown in Table 5, a dramatic
improvement of the drug encapsulation efﬁciency was observed
when the pH-value of the outer water phase was 6.0, which was
close to the iso-electric point of rhI encapsulated. At this iso-
electric point, the solubility of the drug in the outer water phase
was lowered, and it was easier for the drug to absorb onto the sur-
face of the microcapsules, and both favored the improvement of
the drug encapsulation efﬁciency. However, if the improvement
of the drug encapsulation efﬁciency was just due to the adsorp-
tion of the drug onto the surface of the microcapsules, it would
inevitably lead to the high “burst effect”. Fig. 10 shows that at
pH 6.0, the initial release of rhI exceeded 34.0%, larger than
those prepared in the acidic (pH 2.6) or basic (pH 10.0) outer
water phase. This may suggest that at pH 6.0, a large amount of
the drug were on the surface of the microcapsules.
3.7. Effect of microcapsules size
The size of drug-loaded microcapsules plays an important
role in the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and affects the drug
Table 5
Effect of pH-value in outer water phase on the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and
initial release
pH-value in outer
water phase
Encapsulation
efﬁciency (%)
Initial rhI
bursta (%)
2.8
35.11
18.82
6.0
65.61
34.43
10.0
47.88
28.53
a rhI released during the ﬁrst 24 h.
Fig. 10. Effect of pH-value in outer water phase on the drug cumulative release
proﬁle.
cumulative release. By using the membrane emulsiﬁcation tech-
nique, the size of microcapsules can be controlled accurately
by the choice of a membrane with proper pore size, because
there exists a linear relationship between the microcapsules
size and the pore size of membrane [20]. The effect of micro-
capsules size on the drug encapsulation efﬁciency is shown in
Table 6. With increasing the size of microcapsules from 3.2 to
9.0 m, the drug encapsulation efﬁciency increased signiﬁcantly
from 48.96% to 81.27%. To prepare drug-loaded microcapsules,
w1/o/w2 double emulsion droplets were formed ﬁrstly, followed
by the solvent removal process. However, during the process of
the double emulsion droplets formation and solvent removal,
the drug dissolved in the inner water phase was ready to diffuse
into the outer water phase through the oil phase. This would
lead to the loss of drug encapsulated, and thus affecting the drug
encapsulation efﬁciency. When the size of drug-loaded micro-
capsules was smaller, the speciﬁc surface between the emulsion
droplets and the outer water phase became larger, and the drug
had more chance to diffuse into the outer water phase, as a result,
the drug encapsulation efﬁciency decreased accordingly. At the
same condition, drug-loaded PLA microcapsules were also pre-
pared by stirring method, and the drug encapsulation efﬁciency
was compared with those prepared by membrane emulsiﬁcation
technique. It was found that the drug encapsulation efﬁciency
was only 32.85% when microcapsules were prepared by stirring
method, although the size of microcapsules was much larger
than those prepared by membrane emulsiﬁcation technique. The
results conﬁrmed that membrane emulsiﬁcation technique was
Table 6
Effect of microcapsules size on the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and initial
release
Emulsiﬁcation
technique
Mean size
(m)
Encapsulation
efﬁciency (%)
Initial rhI bursta (%)
Membrane
3.2
48.96
46.94
5.8
65.61
34.43
9.0
81.28
14.50
Stirring
15.9
32.85
–
a rhI released during the ﬁrst 24 h.

38
R. Liu et al. / Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 51 (2006) 30–38
Fig. 11. Effect of the microcapsules size on the drug cumulative release proﬁle.
more efﬁcient for encapsulating drugs than stirring method.
FromFig.11,itwasillustratedthatthesmallerthemicrocapsules
size was, the faster the drug released from the microcapsules.
This was largely due to the larger speciﬁc surface between
the microcapsules and the outer water phase. As the size of
microcapsules prepared can be controlled accurately and the
repeatability of the experiment was rather good, it is convenient
to control the drug cumulative release precisely.
4. Conclusion
Uniform-sized biodegradable PLA/PLGA microcapsules
loading rhI were successfully prepared by combining a SPG
membrane emulsiﬁcation technique and a double emulsion-
evaporation method. Various factors of the preparation process
inﬂuencingthedrugencapsulationefﬁciencyandthedrugcumu-
lative release were investigated systemically. The results indi-
cated that the drug encapsulation efﬁciency and the cumulative
release were affected by the PLA/PLGA ratio, NaCl concentra-
tion in outer water phase, inner water phase volume, rhI-loading
amount, pH-value in outer water phase and the size of microcap-
sules. By optimizing the preparation process, the highest drug
encapsulation efﬁciency of 91.82% was obtained. The unique
advantage of preparing drug-loaded microcapsules by mem-
brane emulsiﬁcation technique is that the size of microcapsules
could be controlled accurately, and thus the drug cumulative
release proﬁle can be adjusted just by changing the size of micro-
capsules. Moreover, much higher encapsulation efﬁciency can
be obtained when compared with conventional mechanical stir-
ring method.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the ﬁnancial support of the National
Nature Science Foundation of China under Contract 20125616
and 20221603.
References
[1] F.G. Banting, C.M. Best, Pancreatic extracts, J. Lab. Clin. Med. 7 (1922)
464–472.
[2] M. Takenaga, Y. Yamaguchi, A. Kitagawa, Y. Ogawa, Y. Mizushima, R.
Igarashi, A novel sustained-release formulation of insulin with dramatic
reduction in initial rapid release, J. Control. Release 79 (2002) 81–91.
[3] M. Takenaga, Y. Yamaguchi, A. Kitagawa, Y. Ogawa, S. Kawai, Y.
Mizushima, R. Igarashi, Optimum formulation for sustained-release
insulin, Int. J. Pharm. 271 (2004) 85–94.
[4] Y. Onuki, M. Morishita, K. Takayama, Formulation optimization of
water-in-oil–water multiple emulsion for intestinal insulin delivery, J.
Control. Release 97 (2004) 91–99.
[5] G.P. Carino, E. Mathiowitz, Oral insulin delivery, Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev.
35 (1999) 249–257.
[6] N. Wakiyama, K. Juni, M. Nakano, Preparation and evaluation in vitro
and in vivo of polylactic acid microspheres containing dibucaine, Chem.
Pharm. Bull. 30 (1982) 3719–3727.
[7] Y. Yeo, N. Back, K. Park, Microencapsulation methods for delivery of
protein drugs, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. 6 (2001) 213–230.
[8] R.A. Jain, The manufacturing techniques of various drug-loaded
biodegradable poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) devices, Biomaterials
21 (2000) 2475–2490.
[9] M.N. Vrancken, D.A. Clays, Method for encapsulating water and com-
pounds in aqueous phase by extraction, US Patent 3,526,906 (1970).
[10] N.C. Jaeger, B.H. Trvernier, British Patent 1,405,108 (1971).
[11] Y. Ogawa, M. Yamamoto, S. Takada, H. Okada, T. Shimamoto,
Controlled-release of leuprolide acetate from polylactic acid or co-
poly(lactic/glycolic) acid microparticles: inﬂuence of molecular weight
and copolymer ratio of polymer, Chem. Pharm. Bull. 36 (1988)
1502–1507.
[12] M.E. Le Fevre, D.C. Hancock, D.D. Joel, Intestinal barrier to large
particulates in mice, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 6 (1980) 691–704.
[13] G.H. Ma, M. Nagai, S. Omi, Preparation of uniform poly(lactide) micro-
spheres by employing the Shirasu Porous Glass (SPG) emulsiﬁcation
technique, Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 153 (1999)
383–394.
[14] R. Liu, G.H. Ma, F.T. Meng, Z.G. Su, Preparation of uniform-sized
PLA microcapsules by combining Shirasu Porous Glass (SPG) mem-
brane emulsiﬁcation technique and multiple emulsion-solvent evapora-
tion method, J. Control. Release 103 (2004) 31–43.
[15] R. Liu, G.H. Ma, Y.H. Wan, Z.G. Su, Inﬂuence of process parameters
on the size distribution of PLA microcapsules prepared by combining
membrane emulsiﬁcation technique and double emulsion-solvent evap-
oration method, Colloids Surf. B: Biointerfaces 45 (2005) 144–153.
[16] K.A. Athanasiou, G.G. Niederauer, C.M. Agrawal, Sterilization, toxicity,
biocompatibility and clinical applications of polylactic acid/polyglycolic
acid copolymers, Biomaterials 17 (1996) 93–102.
[17] G.L. Peterson, A simpliﬁcation of the protein assay method of Lowry
et al. which is more generally applicable, Anal. Biochem. 83 (1977)
346–356.
[18] A. Matsumoto, Y. Matsukawa, T. Suzuki, H. Yoshino, M. Kobayashi,
The polymer-alloys method as a new preparation method of biodegrad-
able microspheres: principle and application to cisplatin-loaded micro-
spheres, J. Control. Release 48 (1997) 19–27.
[19] F.T. Meng, G.H. Ma, W. Qiu, Z.G. Su, w/o/w double emulsion technique
using ethyl acetate as organic solvent: effects of its diffusion rate on the
characteristics of microparticles, J. Control. Release 91 (2003) 407–416.
[20] T. Nakashima, M. Shimizu, M. Kukizaki, Particle control of emulsion
by membrane emulsiﬁcation and its applications, Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev.
45 (2000) 47–56.