PLGA Microparticles Entrapping Chitosan-Based Nanoparticles for
the Ocular Delivery of Ranibizumab
Naba Elsaid,*,† Timothy L. Jackson,‡ Zeeneh Elsaid,§ Aljawharah Alqathama,§
and Satyanarayana Somavarapu*,§
†University of Hertfordshire, Hatﬁeld, United Kingdom
‡King’s College London, London, United Kingdom
§University College London School of Pharmacy, London, United Kingdom
ABSTRACT: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading
cause of certiﬁed vision loss worldwide. The standard treatment for
neovascular AMD involves repeated intravitreal injections of therapeutic
proteins directed against vascular endothelial growth factor, such as
ranibizumab. Biodegradable polymers, such as poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA), form delivery vehicles which can be used to treat
posterior segment eye diseases, but suﬀer from poor protein loading and
release. This work describes a “system-within-system”, PLGA micro-
particles incorporating chitosan-based nanoparticles, for improved
loading and sustained intravitreal delivery of ranibizumab. Chitosan-
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (CNAC) was synthesized and its synthesis
conﬁrmed using FT-IR and 1H NMR. Chitosan-based nanoparticles
composed of CNAC, CNAC/tripolyphosphate (CNAC/TPP), chito-
san, chitosan/TPP (chit/TPP), or chit/TPP-hyaluronic acid (chit/TPP-HA) were incorporated in PLGA microparticles using a
modiﬁed w/o/w double emulsion method. Nanoparticles and ﬁnal nanoparticles-within-microparticles were characterized for
their protein−nanoparticle interaction, size, zeta potential, morphology, protein loading, stability, in vitro release, in vivo
antiangiogenic activity, and eﬀects on cell viability. The prepared nanoparticles were 17−350 nm in size and had zeta potentials
of −1.4 to +12 mV. Microscopic imaging revealed spherical nanoparticles on the surface of PLGA microparticles for preparations
containing chit/TPP, CNAC, and CNAC/TPP. Ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency in the preparations varied between 13 and
69% and was highest for the PLGA microparticles containing CNAC nanoparticles. This preparation also showed the slowest
release with no initial burst release compared to all other preparations. Incorporation of TPP to this formulation increased the
rate of protein release and reduced entrapment eﬃciency. PLGA microparticles containing chit/TPP-HA showed the fastest and
near-complete release of ranibizumab. All of the prepared empty particles showed no eﬀect on cell viability up to a concentration
of 12.5 mg/mL. Ranibizumab released from all preparations maintained its structural integrity and in vitro activity. The chit/TPP-
HA preparation enhanced antiangiogenic activity and may provide a potential biocompatible platform for enhanced
antiangiogenic activity in combination with ranibizumab. In conclusion, the PLGA microparticles containing CNAC
nanoparticles showed signiﬁcantly improved ranibizumab loading and release proﬁle. This novel drug delivery system may have
potential for improved intravitreal delivery of therapeutic proteins, thereby reducing the frequency, risk, and cost of burdensome
intravitreal injections.
KEYWORDS: chitosan, ranibizumab, age-related macular degeneration, sustained delivery, antiangiogenic, hyaluronic acid
1. INTRODUCTION
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) accounts for more
UK blindness than all other eye diseases combined.1 There are
approximately 26,000 new cases of wet AMD in the UK every
year.2 Wet AMD is the most aggressive form and is usually
treated with protein or aptamer-based therapy directed against
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF): ranibizumab
(Lucentis), bevacizumab (Avastin), or aﬂibercept (Eylea).
The eﬃcacy of these agents is limited by their short half-
lives, necessitating repeated administration of expensive
intravitreal injections (IVTs)3 that are associated with rare
but sight-threatening complications such as retinal detachment
and endophthalmitis.4 Further, they undergo hydrolytic break-
down by enzymes present in the vitreous and have been
reported to have stability issues secondary to protein
aggregation upon storage, which can potentially aﬀect the
preparation’s shelf life.5,6 Therefore, there is a high demand for
developing a biodegradable sustained-release delivery vehicle
Special Issue: Ocular Therapeutics: Drug Delivery and Pharmacology
Received:
April 14, 2016
Revised:
June 1, 2016
Accepted:
June 10, 2016
Published: June 10, 2016
Article
pubs.acs.org/molecularpharmaceutics
© 2016 American Chemical Society
2923
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
Downloaded via UNIV OF MARYLAND COLG PARK on October 22, 2025 at 16:48:02 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

with high protein loading and maintained protein stability.
Further, the physicochemical properties, such as the size and
size distribution, of the delivery vehicle inﬂuence formulation
reproducibility, dose uniformity, and suitability for IVT.7 One
candidate vehicle is PLGA microparticles. These are FDA
approved, biodegradable drug delivery systems which have been
used extensively for the controlled delivery of proteins8,9 and
intravitreal corticosteroids like Ozurdex (Allergan Inc., Irvine,
CA, USA). However, these delivery vehicles suﬀer from
limitations like poor protein stability, loading, an initial burst
release, and nonuniform particle sizes.10−12 Studies have
addressed these limitations by altering process parameters like
polymer concentration, solvent composition, stabilizer concen-
tration, and the incorporation of additives.13,14 However, this
usually overcomes only one or two limitations.
This study describes a “system-within-system”, composed of
chitosan-based nanoparticles within PLGA microparticles for
intravitreal delivery of ranibizumab. Chitosan was chosen as it is
a biodegradable, biocompatible polymer with potential to
improve the physicochemical properties of PLGA micro-
particles and oﬀers additional antiangiogenic activity,15,16
potentially enhancing the therapeutic eﬀect of ranibizumab.
There are many reported mechanisms for the antiangiogenic
activity of chitosan which vary with the type, molecular weight
(MW), and concentration of chitosan used as well as the target
cell type. It has been reported to inhibit endothelial cell
migration17 and tumor invasion.18 Recently, chitosan has also
been shown to inhibit lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced
interleukin-8 (IL-8) production in endothelial cells involved
in the pathogenesis of vascular diseases,19 although some
studies have reported the opposite eﬀect, namely, angio-
genesis.20−22
Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a viscous polyanion which
constitutes a major portion of the human vitreous humor23
and has been used previously for sustained protein delivery.24
What is more, as with chitosan, high molecular weight (MW)
HA has also been shown to exhibit antiangiogenic activity25 and
has shown favorable physicochemical properties when used to
coat chit/TPP nanoparticles, such as reducing size polydisper-
sity, increasing zeta potential, and improving particle size
stability.26 Given these properties, HA was assessed in this
study for its eﬀects on PLGA-based ranibizumab delivery.
A chemically modiﬁed derivative of chitosan, chitosan-N-
acetyl-L-cysteine (CNAC), was also used to prepare nano-
particles and compare their eﬀects with those of unmodiﬁed
chitosan-based nanoparticles on PLGA-based ranibizumab
delivery. CNAC diﬀers from unmodiﬁed chitosan by containing
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), which introduces a thiol group that
has been shown to form strong disulﬁde bonds with cysteine-
rich domains of the mucus glycoproteins accounting for
stronger mucoadhesive properties compared to chitosan.27
Therefore, it may be postulated that the NAC component of
CNAC forms strong disulﬁde bonds with the 10 cysteine
residues present in ranibizumab28 enhancing nanoparticle−
protein interactions and improving loading and release of
ranibizumab in PLGA microparticles. Further, VEGF has 8
cysteine residues,29 therefore, CNAC may introduce additive
antiangiogenic activity via VEGF binding and consequent
neutralization. Indeed, NAC has been reported to have
antiangiogenic activity and targets multiple pathways involved
in angiogenesis including oxidation and inﬂammation.30,31
Given NAC and chitosan’s antiangiogenic activity, we
hypothesized that CNAC would enhance the antiangiogenic
activity of ranibizumab.
Sodium tripolyphosphate (TPP) was used as a cross-linking
agent with chitosan, CNAC, and chitosan/HA to form
uniformly distributed stable nanoparticles.32 Chitosan/TPP
(chit/TPP) nanoparticles have shown good ocular biocompat-
ibility.
We aimed to develop chitosan-based nanoparticles within
PLGA microparticles for improved intravitreal delivery of
ranibizumab.
2. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
2.1. Materials. The following materials were commercially
obtained and used as received: hyaluronic acid sodium salt
(MW 1.5−1.8 × 106 Da, from Streptococcus equi, Fluka
BioChemika, St. Louis, Mo, USA), chitosan hydrochloride
(chitosan, MW; ≤400 kDa, DDA 80−95%, Heppe Medical,
Halle, Germany), PLGA (85:15 DL, MW 149 kDa, Alkermes
Medisorb, Wilmington, OH, USA), ranibizumab (Novartis,
Frimley, UK), recombinant human vascular endothelial growth
factor 165 (VEGF, PeproTech, NJ, USA), goat anti-human IgG
F(ab′)2 antibody:horseradish peroxidase (HRP, SeroTech,
Oxford, UK), tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate and
TMB stop reagent (SurModics/BioFX Laboratories, Eden
Prairie, MN, USA), Laemmli sample buﬀer (BioRad, Herts,
UK), 2-mercaptoethanol (98%, Lancaster Synthesis, Lancs.,
UK), Coomassie Brilliant Blue stain (BioRad Laboratories, Inc.,
California, USA), low-growth factor synthetic matrix (Matrigel,
BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA), 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-
(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium
(MTS) and phenazine methosulfate (PMS) (CellTiter 96
AQueous One solution, Promega, Madison, WI), and mouse
tumor (BD Biosciences, Bedford, UK). The following were
purchased from Life Technologies (Paisley, Scotland, UK):
TrypLE Express (1×, trypsin, EDTA, phenol red), SYTO 9,
and propidium iodide. The following materials were obtained
from Fisher (Leicestershire, UK): sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
glacial acetic acid, methanol, sodium chloride, sodium hydrogen
carbonate, potassium chloride, and potassium dihydrogen
orthophosphate. The following materials were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA): sodium acetate
(anhydrous), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA, 87−89% hydrolyzed,
MW: 13−23 kDa),
D-(+)-trehalose dehydrate, 1-ethyl-3-(3-
(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide, hydrochloride (EDAC·
HCl), NAC, crystal violet (dye content ≥90%), bovine serum
albumin (BSA), Tween 20, cetylpyridinium chloride, sodium
azide, calcium chloride, sodium tripolyphosphate, Ham’s F-10
medium (pH 7.4), anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO,
>99.9%), Dulbecco’s phosphate-buﬀered saline (DPBS),
L-
glutamine 200 mM, fetal bovine serum (FBS), antibiotic-
antimycotic solution (100 units/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL
streptomycin, and 25 ng/mL amphotericin B), M199 medium,
porcine gelatin, porcine heparin, endothelial cell growth
supplement, Triton-X, and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).
The following materials were obtained from VWR International
(Lutterworth, UK): magnesium sulfate, disodium hydrogen
phosphate dehydrate, and dichloromethane (DCM, stabilized
with 0.2% of ethanol). The water used throughout all of the
experimental procedures was ultrapure water.
2.2. Synthesis of CNAC. CNAC was synthesized as
described previously,33 with slight modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy, 6 g
of chitosan was dissolved in 100 mL of acetate buﬀer (pH 4.5)
at room temperature. Twenty-four grams of NAC plus 8.64 g of
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2924

EDAC·HCl was dissolved in 100 mL of acetate buﬀer under
continuous stirring for 30 min and nitrogen atmosphere. NAC
solution was then added to the chitosan solution and left to stir
overnight at 4 °C under nitrogen atmosphere. This was then
dialyzed (MWCO; 12−14 kDa, Medicell International,
London, UK), in the dark, for 5 days and lyophilized to obtain
the CNAC powder.
2.3. 1H NMR and Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR)
Spectroscopy. 1H NMR spectra for CNAC and its native
constituents (chitosan and NAC) was recorded on a Bruker
400 MHz Ultrashield NMR spectrometer (Bruker Avance,
Rheinstetten, Germany). IR spectra for these components and
the prepared nanoparticles were recorded on a PerkinElmer
Spectrum 100 FT-IR spectrometer (spectral range of 4000 to
400 cm−1 PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA).
2.4. Preparation of Chitosan-Based Nanoparticles
Containing Ranibizumab. Chitosan-based nanoparticles
containing ranibizumab were prepared to be added to PLGA
microparticles (section 2.6). The nanoparticles were composed
of chitosan, chitosan/TPP (chit/TPP), chit/TPP-HA, CNAC,
or CNAC/TPP. 0.5% w/v chitosan or CNAC solution was
prepared in 5% w/v PVA/acetate buﬀer (pH 5). Five
milligrams of ranibizumab (drug-containing nanoparticles) or
an equivalent volume of water (empty particles) was added
dropwise to this solution and left to stir for 15 min. Water (for
chitosan or CNAC particles) or 0.05% w/v TPP solution (for
chit/TPP, chit/TPP-HA, or CNAC/TPP) was added dropwise
and left to stir for a further 45 min. Chit/TPP-HA
nanoparticles were prepared by adding 0.25% w/v of HA
solution at the end. The composition of the resultant
nanoparticles was chitosan (or CNAC):ranibizumab:TPP:HA
in a ratio of 10:10:1:5.
2.5. Characterization of Chitosan-Based Nanopar-
ticles. 2.5.1. Particle Size and Zeta Potential. A Malvern
Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire,
UK) instrument which utilizes dynamic light scattering (DLS)
and laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) was used to measure the
size and zeta potential of the particles, respectively.
2.5.2. Morphological Examination of Chitosan-Based
Particles Using Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM).
Approximately 40 μL of each preparation was placed on a
copper grid, covered with nitrocellulose, and negatively stained
with 1% uranyl acetate. Images were obtained using a FEI CM
120 Bio Twin transmission electron microscope (Philips
Electron Optics BV, The Netherlands).
2.6. Preparation of a System-within-System, Com-
posed of Chitosan-Based Nanoparticles-within-PLGA
Microparticles. Chitosan-based nanoparticles were added to
PLGA microparticles using the w/o/w double emulsion
method,33 with modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy, 100 mg of PLGA was
dissolved in 2.5 mL of DCM. One milliliter of primary aqueous
phase containing the chitosan-based nanoparticles (section 2.4)
was added to this and the suspension homogenized (Ultra
Turrax T25 basic, Ika-Werke, Staufen, Germany) at 21 krpm
for 2 min. The resultant primary emulsion was added to 3 mL
of secondary continuous phase composed of 1% w/v PVA plus
0.5% w/v of empty chitosan-based nanoparticles, prepared as
outlined in section 2.4. To avoid creating a concentration
gradient which would act as driving force for diﬀusion, aﬀecting
the drug entrapment eﬃciency and release,34 a similar
concentration of nanoparticles was used in the primary phase
and continuous phase for all of the preparations. The mixture
was homogenized for a further 2 min. Solvent extraction was
carried out by mixing at room temperature for 3 h. The
resultant particles were washed by centrifugation (Optima L-
90K Ultracentrifuge, Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) at 4 °C,
21 krpm, for 25 min. The supernatants from these washes were
used to quantify the free ranibizumab content.
2.7. Characterization of Nanoparticle-within-Micro-
particle Drug Delivery System. 2.7.1. Particle Size and
Zeta Potential. Particles were measured for their size using
laser diﬀraction (Malvern Mastersizer S long bench, Malvern,
UK) and zeta potential using LDV as outlined in section 2.5.1.
2.7.2. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Approximately
2 mg of lyophilized sample was placed onto a metal stub and
sputter coated with 20 nm gold using a Quorum Q150
(Quorum Ltd., UK). This was viewed using a scanning electron
microscope (FEI Quanta 200F, Eindhoven, The Netherlands).
2.8. Determination of Ranibizumab Entrapment
Eﬃciency. The ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency was
calculated by measuring the diﬀerence between the amount
of protein added and the free protein in the supernatant of the
preparation, as outlined previously.35,36 Indirect ELISA was
used for the quantiﬁcation of ranibizumab. Brieﬂy, high-binding
96-well plates (Greiner Microlon High Binding, Greiner Bio-
One, Frickenhausen, Germany) were coated with 1 μg/mL
VEGF and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The plates were then
washed twice with PBS, blocked with 1% w/v BSA, and then
washed a further two times with 5% Tween 20/PBS, after
which the ranibizumab standards and samples were added. The
plates were then incubated for 2 h at 37 °C and washed again
with 5% w/v Tween 20/PBS. This was followed by the addition
of 1:4000 HRP detection antibody and incubation for 1 h at 37
°C. The wash step was repeated followed by the addition of
TMB substrate plus a 30 min incubation. The reaction was
stopped using the stop reagent and the absorbance read at 450
nm using a microplate ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Synergy
HT, Bio-Tek Instruments, VT, USA).
2.9. In Vitro Ranibizumab Release Studies. Ranibizumab
released from the prepared particles was determined using the
separation technique,37 by suspending the PLGA pellet in 10
mL of release medium containing Hanks balanced salt solution
(HBSS), pH 7.4, and 0.05% w/v sodium azide. This buﬀer was
prepared as described previously.38 The suspension was placed
in airtight containers and incubated at 37 °C with mild
continuous agitation (80 rpm, orbital incubator, Gallenkamp;
Loughborough, UK). At predetermined time intervals (ranging
from 30 min up to 7 months), the pH was measured to ensure
minimal changes and the suspension centrifuged at 13 krpm for
15 min. The supernatant containing the released ranibizumab
was collected and quantiﬁed using ELISA (section 2.8). The
pellet was resuspended in fresh release medium and
reincubated. The average cumulative ranibizumab released
was plotted against time.
2.10. Analysis of the Structural Integrity of Ranibizu-
mab Released from PLGA Microparticles. The structural
integrity of ranibizumab released from PLGA microparticles
was analyzed using SDS−PAGE, as previously described,39 with
modiﬁcations. Equivalent amounts of native and released
ranibizumab (quantiﬁed using a BCA kit, Micro BCA Protein
Assay, Pierce, Rockford, IL) were treated with sample buﬀer
containing 2-mercaptoethanol and Laemmli buﬀer for 5 min at
95 °C. The samples were then loaded onto polyacrylamide gels
(Any kD) along with Precision Plus protein standard (both
from BioRad, Herts, UK). Electrophoresis was performed at a
constant voltage of 150 V for 45 min (Bio-Rad power PAC
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2925

1000, Melville, NY). Protein bands were stained using
Coomassie Brilliant Blue stain for analysis.
2.11. Cell Studies. The safety of the nanoparticles-within-
microparticles was assessed by analyzing their eﬀect on
mitochondrial activity via MTS assay and for any changes in
cell morphology using the Live/Dead assay. The cell lines
human retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19, American Type
Culture Collection, VA, USA) and human vascular endothelial
(HUVECs, Caltag Medsystems, Buckingham, UK) were used in
this study. ARPE-19 cells were cultured in Ham’s F-10 medium
(pH 7.4), supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, antibiotic-
antimycotic solution, and 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum (FBS). HUVECs were grown on cell culture ﬂasks
precoated with 0.1% porcine gelatin and maintained in M199
medium (pH 7.4) supplemented with 20% FBS, 2 mM L-
glutamine, 100 μg/mL porcine heparin, 50 μg/mL endothelial
cell growth supplement, and antibiotic-antimycotic solution.
The culturing medium for both HUVEC and ARPE-19 cells is
referred to as complete growth medium (CGM). Both cell lines
were cultured in a humidiﬁed chamber set at 37 °C and 5%
CO2 atmosphere.
2.11.1. In Vitro Cytotoxicity Studies. The eﬀect of native
ranibizumab and empty PLGA microparticles on the viability of
ARPE-19 and HUVECs was determined using CellTiter 96
AQueous One solution (MTS) assay. A qualitative analysis of
this eﬀect was also carried out using ﬂuorescence microscopy
(Live/Dead assay) to investigate the eﬀects, if any, of the
samples on the morphology of the cells. 96-Well plates were
seeded with 2 × 104 cells/mL using CGM and incubated for 48
h before being replaced with low-serum (2% FBS) medium and
incubated for a further 12 h. Native ranibizumab (7.63 × 105,
2.5 mg/mL) and empty PLGA microparticles (3.81 × 104, 12.5
mg/mL), together with the controls (negative, 1% Triton X,
and positive, untreated medium) were added to the plate and
incubated for a further 24 h. Following the incubation period
the MTS assay was conducted according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, absorbance read (UV spectrophotometer, Synergy
HT, Bio-Tek Instruments, VT, USA), and data normalized to
untreated cells. Live/Dead assay was performed by exposing the
cells to native ranibizumab and empty PLGA microparticles
containing chitosan-based nanoparticles for 24 h. A mixture of
3.34 μM SYTO 9 and 5 μg/mL propidium iodide was then
added, and ﬂuorescent images were obtained (EVOS
ﬂuorescence microscope, Lifetech, UK).
2.11.2. Assessment of Antiangiogenic Activity. 2.11.2.1. Ef-
fect of Ranibizumab Released from PLGA Microparticles on
Endothelial Cell Migration. Endothelial cell migration is a key
process involved in angiogenesis.40 Therefore, the antiangio-
genic activity of ranibizumab released from PLGA micro-
particles was assessed by analyzing inhibition of VEGF-
stimulated HUVEC migration as described in ref 41, with
modiﬁcations. HUVECs were trypsinized at 70% conﬂuence
and resuspended in low serum medium. Cells were then seeded
(4 × 105 cells/mL) onto Matrigel-coated Transwell inserts (8.0
μm polycarbonate membrane, 6.5 mm, Corning Costar,
Cambridge, UK) and placed into lower chambers containing
M199 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 10 ng/mL VEGF
(negative control), and 125 μg/mL native ranibizumab
(positive control) or ranibizumab released from PLGA
microparticles. The released ranibizumab was collected as
previously described42 and concentrated to 125 μg/mL using
centrifugal concentrators (10 kDa MWCO, Vivaspins,
Vivascience, Hannover, Germany) which were spun at 4
krpm, 4 °C, for 15 min (Centrifuge 5804R, Eppendorf,
Germany). 125 μg/mL ranibizumab was selected to represent
the therapeutic concentration following injection into the
human vitreous. The plate was then incubated for 20 h at 37 °C
and 5% CO2 atmosphere. Following the incubation period,
nonmigrated cells were removed using a cotton swab, inserts
washed twice with PBS, and migrated cells ﬁxed using absolute
methanol. The migrated cells were stained using 0.5% crystal
violet, viewed using a light microscope (Nikon Microphot-FXA,
Nikon, Tokyo, Japan), and quantiﬁed by counting the number
of cells in six random ﬁelds per insert. Images were captured
using a Nikon digital camera (Nikon, Kingston upon Thames,
UK) and processed using Inﬁnity Capture application (version
6.2). Data was expressed as the percentage of cells/ﬁeld (mean
± SD, n = 6) migrated in the presence of ranibizumab relative
to the VEGF control.
2.11.2.2. Eﬀect of Released Chitosan and Chit/TPP
Particles with or without Ranibizumab on Capillary-like
Tubule Formation. Chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles showed the
highest antiangiogenic eﬀect and as a result were taken further
to be assessed using the capillary-like tubule formation assay
(V2a kit, TCS Cellworks, Buckingham, UK). Cells were
exposed to VEGF (2 ng/mL) plus 125 μg/mL native
ranibizumab or ranibizumab plus chit/TPP or chit/TPP-HA
nanoparticles or equivalent concentrations of empty nano-
particles. VEGF (promotes angiogenesis) and 20 μM suramin
(inhibits angiogenesis) were used as the negative and positive
controls, respectively. Wells were viewed using a Leitz Diavert
phase contrast microscope and images captured using a Nikon
digital camera (Nikon, Kingston upon Thames, UK). The
images were then processed using Inﬁnity Capture application
(v. 6.2, Lumenera Corp., Canada) and tubules quantiﬁed using
AngioSys 2.0 software (v. 1.0.0.2, TCS Cellworks, Buckingham,
UK) for their length as previously described.43,44 Data was
presented as the total tubule length relative to the VEGF
control, for each sample (mean ± SD, n = 3).
2.12. Statistical Analysis. Statistical analysis was carried
out on all data using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
and unpaired two-tailed Student t-test. A p value of <0.05 was
taken to be signiﬁcant. Data are presented as the mean ±
standard deviation (SD) from 3 independent studies, unless
otherwise stated.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Conﬁrmation of CNAC Synthesis. 3.1.1. The
Conﬁrmation of CNAC Synthesis Using FTIR. Figure 1
shows the FT-IR spectra for the synthesized CNAC polymer
and its native constituents NAC and chitosan. CNAC showed
an increase in the intensity of the absorption peak at 1638
(amide I band), 1520 (amide II band), and 1311 (amide III)
cm−1 compared to native chitosan. This is ascribed to the
Figure 1. FT-IR spectra for the synthesized CNAC polymer and its
native constituents, chitosan and NAC. Abbreviations: NAC, N-acetyl-
L-cysteine; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2926

presence of an additional amide bond from the NAC group,45
conﬁrming the successful synthesis of CNAC.
3.1.2. Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (1H NMR). The
1H NMR spectrum of CNAC (Figure 2C) shows peaks at 2.91
and 1.97 ppm which conﬁrm the synthesis of this polymer. The
peak at 2.91 ppm corresponds to the conjugated NAC group
“CH2SH” replacing the N-acetyl methyl proton seen in chitosan
at 2.14 ppm (Figure 2B). This correlates with recent ﬁndings.45
The successful conjugation of the NAC group to chitosan was
further conﬁrmed by a peak at 1.97 ppm which was present in
both NAC (Figure 2A) and CNAC (Figure 2C) and
corresponds to the methyl proton present in both entities.46
These ﬁndings, together with the FT-IR results, conﬁrm the
successful synthesis of the CNAC polymer.
3.2. Characterization of Chitosan-Based Nanopar-
ticles. Particle size, distribution, zeta potential, and morphol-
ogy of the nanoparticles constituting the primary aqueous
phase of the preparation were analyzed as these parameters
inﬂuence the stability of the primary emulsion and
subsequently the protein loading and release.47
3.2.1. Particle Size and Zeta Potential. Figure 3 shows the
particle size (Figure 3A) and zeta potential (Figure 3B) of the
prepared nanoparticles. The size was relatively similar to
another study utilizing nanoparticles in PLGA microparticles
which reported a nanoparticle size of 513 nm.47 Empty chit/
TPP particles were signiﬁcantly larger than chitosan particles
(345.5 ± 2.5 and 40.1 ± 3 nm, respectively, p = 1.79 × 10−8)
and previously reported chit/TPP particles of sizes up to 226
nm.48 This is due to the use of a higher chitosan MW and chit/
TPP ratio of 10:1 compared 4:148 as these parameters have
been reported to inﬂuence the particle size.49 Conversely,
CNAC/TPP nanoparticles had a signiﬁcantly smaller size of
71.8 ± 5.6 nm (p = 4.77 × 10−6) compared to chit/TPP
particles and previously reported CNAC/TPP nanoparticles of
166.3 nm.45 Although a higher chitosan MW was used in this
study compared to Wang’s study (MW ≤400 kDa and 20 kDa,
Figure 2. 1H NMR spectra of NAC (A), chitosan (B), and CNAC (C). Samples were dissolved at a concentration of 8 mg/mL in D2O. Gray line
indicates solvent peaks. Abbreviations: NAC, N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2927

respectively),45 the smaller particles obtained in this study may
be due to the type of chitosan salt used as this has also been
shown to inﬂuence the size.49 This is further conﬁrmed by
comparing CNAC nanoparticles prepared from a diﬀerent
chitosan salt with a similar MW to that which is used in this
study; they obtained a larger size of 214 ± 10 nm compared to
25.7 ± 2.6 nm.50 The reason behind the signiﬁcantly (p =
0.003) smaller size of CNAC nanoparticles compared to the
chitosan particles was the stronger intermolecular interactions
resulting from CNAC’s thiol group.50,51 The incorporation of
HA with chit/TPP did not inﬂuence the particle size
signiﬁcantly (chit/TPP-HA; 350.7 ± 2.5 nm) compared to
chit/TPP (345.5 ± 2.5 nm; p = 0.11) but was larger than
previously reported HA chitosan nanoparticles (163−182
nm).52,53 Native ranibizumab had a size of 8.37 ± 0.2 nm,
which is in line with a previous study.54 Entrapping
ranibizumab in the chitosan-based nanoparticles had varying
eﬀects with a decrease in size obtained for chitosan and
CNAC/TPP particles and an increase in size obtained for the
chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles. This may be due to a diﬀerence in
the interaction between the protein and the nanoparticles.
Particle zeta potential is shown in Figure 3B. The charge of
native ranibizumab was near neutral charge, at +0.44 ± 1.5 mV,
and is in line with a previous study.19 Particle zeta potential was
predominantly positive as a result of the polycation,
chitosan.55−57 This decreased with the CNAC nanoparticles
due to the NAC component and is in agreement with a
previous study.45 A further decrease in the positive zeta
potential was observed for the chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles as a
result of the polyanion HA. However, the polyanion TPP had
diﬀerent eﬀects on the zeta potential of chitosan and CNAC
nanoparticles, where there was a further decrease in the positive
zeta potential of CNAC/TPP particles and no eﬀect on the zeta
potential of chit/TPP nanoparticles. This may have been due to
stronger electrostatic interactions from the NAC component in
CNAC with the TPP compared to the unmodiﬁed chitosan
with TPP. Entrapment of ranibizumab in all of the nano-
particles caused a reduction in the zeta potential. This
demonstrates ranibizumab binding to the chitosan component
and is further conﬁrmed by FT-IR (Figure 5)
3.2.2. Nanoparticle Morphology. Figure 4 shows TEM
micrographs for the chitosan-based nanoparticles containing
ranibizumab. The particle sizes appeared smaller than those
reported in DLS (section 3.2.1) as TEM generates images for
particles in their dry state, whereas DLS measures the particle
size in their swollen state.58,59 However, the general trend
stands, where CNAC and CNAC/TPP nanoparticles are
smaller than all of the other nanoparticles. Both chitosan
(Figure 4) and CNAC (Figure 4) nanoparticles had
anisometric morphologies. TPP complexation with chitosan
(Figure 4Cx) or CNAC (Figure 4Ex) caused the formation of
nanoparticle islands of approximately 150 nm sizes containing
smaller nanoparticles. This has been noted previously for chit/
TPP nanoparticles32,60 but not for the CNAC/TPP nano-
particles45 which appeared smaller compared to the chit/TPP
nanoparticles (approximately 6 nm and 12−30 nm, respec-
Figure 3. Particle size (A) and zeta potential (B) of native ranibizumab and chitosan, chit/TPP, CNAC, CNAC/TPP, and chit/TPP-HA with and
without ranibizumab. Data are presented as the mean ± SD, n = 3. Error bars show the standard deviation. Abbreviations: r, ranibizumab; C,
chitosan; C/T, chit/TPP; chit/T-HA, chit/TPP-HA; CNAC/T, CNAC/TPP; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; HA, hyaluronic acid; TPP,
tripolyphosphate.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2928

tively). Further inspection of the chit/TPP sample revealed
novel “globule-like” nanoparticles (Figure 4Cxx) with approx-
imate sizes of 300 nm containing smaller nanoparticles. Chit/
TPP-HA (Figure 4D) nanoparticles appeared spherical as
reported previously.53 No signs of aggregates were observed
under TEM for any of the samples.
3.2.3. Particle−Protein Interaction. Ranibizumab (Figure
5A) showed absorption peaks at 995, 1037, and 1085 cm−1
corresponding to C−H bending and C−F and C−O
stretching, respectively.61 These peaks were visible in the
spectra for chitosan, chit/TPP, and chit/TPP-HA (Figure 5B),
as well as CNAC and CNAC-TPP (Figure 5C) containing
ranibizumab, thus conﬁrming the presence of an interaction
between these particles and ranibizumab. An interaction
between the PO group of TPP and NH3+ present in the
chitosan-based particles was apparent by the increased peak
intensity at 1180 cm−1.62 The absorption peaks at 1625 cm−1
(amide I, CO stretching) and 1516 cm−1 (amide II, CN
stretching, NH bending) of the chit/TPP-HA preparation
conﬁrm an interaction between the amino groups in chitosan
and the carboxyl groups in HA.63
3.3. Characterization of nanoparticle-within-micro-
particle drug delivery system. 3.3.1. Particle Size and Zeta
Potential. The size (Figure 6) of the nanoparticle-within-
microparticle drug delivery system was measured to assess the
suitability for IVT. The particle sizes were in the range of 3.04−
6.04 μm, which is considerably smaller than previously reported
particles of sizes 14−21 μm8,64 which showed no eﬀects on the
retinal in vivo studies. Thus, based on the size, the particles
appear to be suitable for IVT. The particle size distribution is
also in good agreement with the SEM studies (section 3.3.2).
There was no diﬀerence in the size of the PLGA particles
containing chitosan (p = 0.06), chit/TPP (p = 0.08), or chit/
TPP-HA (p = 0.82) nanoparticles. However, the PLGA
particles containing CNAC were signiﬁcantly smaller than the
control (p = 0.005) and chitosan (p = 0.0045). This is likely
attributed to the NAC component, which may have increased
the osmotic pressure inside the PLGA matrix, preventing
inward diﬀusion of water molecules.65 This may also account
for the higher protein entrapment (section 3.4) and slower
release (section 3.5). The addition of ranibizumab did not
inﬂuence the size of the PLGA microparticles, with exception to
those containing CNAC/TPP nanoparticles where an increase
in the size was obtained relative to CNAC-containing
microparticles (p = 0.0009) and the control (p = 0.004).
This results from a diﬀerence in the protein−nanoparticle
interaction and may account for the lower protein entrapment
eﬃciency (section 3.4) and higher release (section 3.5)
obtained with the CNAC/TPP preparation relative to the
CNAC preparation.
Figure 6 shows the zeta potential of the preparations. The
use of chitosan increased the positive zeta potential of the
overall system (−12.2 ± 2 mV control compared to +4.3 ± 1.6
mV, p = 3 × 10−4). The presence of TPP in the preparations
did not inﬂuence the zeta potential of chitosan-containing
preparations but reduced the positive zeta potential in CNAC/
TPP compared to PLGA microparticles containing chit/TPP (p
= 0.049) or CNAC (p = 0.03). This may be due to additive
eﬀect of two negatively charged groups (TPP combined with
the thiol group in CNAC).
3.3.2. Particle Morphology Assessed Using SEM. Figure 7A
shows the morphology of the synthesized polymer and drug
delivery systems. At low magniﬁcation, the CNAC polymer has
a shard-like appearance (Figure 7A). However, upon closer
inspection (Figure 7 Ax), a well-deﬁned interior of nano-
particles closely stacked together is apparent. These represent
Figure 4. TEM images of ranibizumab (A) and the following ranibizumab-containing particles: chitosan (B), chit/TPP (C, Cx, Cxx), chit/TPP-HA
(D), CNAC (E, Ex), and CNAC/TPP (F). Abbreviations: chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-
hyaluronic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2929

CNAC nanoparticles as it has the ability to self-assemble.50 A
diﬀerence in the particle morphology has been reported to
result in diﬀerent drug release proﬁles.66 The PLGA control
(Figure 7B) was mostly spherical and nonuniformly sized
microparticles with an average size of 5 μm. These were smaller
but had a similar surface morphology to previous ﬁndings.67
The addition of chitosan (Figure 7C) formed a layered coat67,68
with the presence of rod-shaped entities (Figure 7Cx) on the
surface of the microparticles and was similar to previous
ﬁndings.67
Microparticles containing chit/TPP (Figure 7D) had a
similar morphology to these. However, the surface was coated
with nanoparticles (Figure 7Dx) of similar morphology (Figure
7Dxx) and size distribution (DLS, section 3.2.1) as chit/TPP
Figure 5. FT-IR spectra for r, TPP, and HA (A); chitosan, chit/TPP, and chit/TPP-HA particles with and without r (B); and CNAC and CNAC/
TPP particles with and without r (C). Abbreviations: r, ranibizumab; chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/
tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Figure 6. Particle size (μm) and zeta potential (mV). Data are represented as the mean ± SD, n = 3. Error bars show the standard deviation.
Abbreviations: r, ranibizumab; chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; NAC, N-acetyl-L-
cysteine; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2930

nanoparticles, suggesting that these PLGA microparticles may
be coated with the chit/TPP nanoparticles. A similar outcome
was observed with the microparticles containing chit/TPP-HA
(Figure 7E), CNAC (Figure 7F), and CNAC/TPP (Figure
7G). However, the coating of the CNAC particles (Figure 7Fx)
appeared to diﬀer in morphology from these particles, and this
diﬀerence may have contributed to the improved ranibizumab
loading and prevention of the initial burst release. All other
particles had an initial burst release with those of similar
morphologies (chit/TPP, chit/TPP-HA, and CNAC/TPP)
having similar and higher rates of ranibizumab release relative
to the control and chitosan-containing PLGA microparticles.
3.4. Ranibizumab Entrapment Eﬃciency. Figure 8
shows the ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency in the drug
delivery systems. The unmodiﬁed PLGA microparticles
contained 29 ± 3.8% ranibizumab, which was similar to
previous studies reporting an entrapment eﬃciency in the range
of 31−44%.12,69 The addition of chitosan nanoparticles caused
a decrease in ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency (13 ± 2.0%, p
= 0.04). Previous studies have shown both an increase67 and
decrease45 in protein entrapment eﬃciency as a result of
chitosan incorporation. This may be due to a diﬀerence in the
type and MW of chitosan used. For example, a study which
used a chitosan with a much larger MW (1000 kDa compared
to ≤400 kDa used in this study) reported an increase in protein
entrapment.67 The use of TPP in chit/TPP, chit/TPP-HA, and
CNAC/TPP did not aﬀect the entrapment eﬃciency of
ranibizumab relative to the control (p = 0.25, 0.89, and 0.14,
Figure 7. Scanning electron microscopy images for CNAC polymer (A and Ax) and PLGA microparticles containing no additions (control) (B),
chitosan (C and Cx), chit/TPP (D and Dx and chitosan particles alone, Dxx), chit/TPP-HA (E), CNAC (F and Fx), and CNAC/TPP (G).
Abbreviations: chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-
cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Figure 8. Ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency in PLGA (control) and PLGA microparticles containing chitosan-based particles. Data are presented as
the mean ± SD, n = 3. Error bars show the standard deviation. Abbreviations: chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA;, chitosan/
tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; NAC, N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2931

respectively). Similar results were also obtained for the
morphology and protein release of these particles, indicating
that TPP has similar interactions with the unmodiﬁed and
NAC-modiﬁed form of chitosan. However, the CNAC particles
had the highest ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency of 69 ±
14%. This is in agreement with another study which reported
improved drug loading of 62−76% as a result of CNAC.70 The
enhanced ranibizumab entrapment eﬃciency is as a result of the
NAC component as this is the single entity which diﬀerentiates
the particles. The reason behind this eﬀect is yet to be
elucidated, however three postulations may be put forward.
First, CNAC nanoparticles increase the hydrophilicity71 and
improve ranibizumab solubilization and entrapment within the
particles compared to the chitosan or chit/TPP nano-
particles.27,50 Second, the thiol group present in the NAC
component of the CNAC nanoparticles has been reported to
form strong disulﬁde bonds with the cysteine residues of mucus
glycoproteins.27 As ranibizumab contains 10 cysteine resi-
dues,28 it is anticipated that CNAC will form stronger
interactions with ranibizumab retaining it inside the PLGA
microparticles and minimizing loss during preparation. This
eﬀect may also contribute to the absence of an initial burst
release and slower release compared to all of the other
preparations (section 3.5). Finally, CNAC is more viscous than
chitosan,33 and studies have shown that increasing the viscosity
of the PLGA matrix improves protein loading.72
3.5. Protein Release from PLGA Microparticles. The in
vitro release of ranibizumab was investigated to determine the
eﬀect of incorporating the chitosan-based nanoparticles in the
PLGA microparticles (Figure 9). The PLGA control showed a
biphasic response as previously reported,73,74 with an initial
burst release followed by a sustained-release period. The
addition of chitosan did not alter the release proﬁle but
increased the rate of protein release as reported previously.75−77
Microparticles containing chit/TPP showed a triphasic release
proﬁle with a higher initial rate of release relative to the control.
Further, chit/TPP-HA and CNAC/TPP both showed mono-
phasic release with highest initial rate and content of release.
Figure 9. Ranibizumab release from PLGA microparticles. Data are presented as the mean ± SD, n = 3. Error bars show the standard deviation.
Abbreviations: chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; NAC, N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC,
chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine.
Figure 10. SDS−PAGE band patterns for native ranibizumab (R) and ranibizumab released from PLGA microparticles containing chitosan-based
nanoparticles.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2932

The higher protein release obtained for chit/TPP, chit/TPP-
HA, and CNAC/TPP is likely attributed to the nanoparticle
presentation on the microparticles and protein−nanoparticle
interaction. On the other hand, PLGA microparticles
containing CNAC showed a similar biphasic release proﬁle
compared to control and chitosan but considerably lower, and
this formulation was the only one which had no initial burst
release. Previous studies have also obtained release proﬁles for
CNAC particles with no initial burst release.50,51 This is
because CNAC has higher viscosity compared to chitosan,33
creating a viscous microenvironment which favors sustained
delivery.78 Another possible reason may be due to the particle
coating which was apparent in the SEM images (section 3.3.2,
Figure 7Fx) as this has been reported to reduce the burst-
release eﬀect.79 In summary, CNAC has improved the release
proﬁle of PLGA microparticles, providing a potential platform
for sustained intravitreal delivery of ranibizumab. PLGA
microparticles containing chit/TPP-HA or CNAC/TPP may
be used for the delivery of ocular drugs required for an
immediate response.
The concentration of ranibizumab which has been shown to
neutralize VEGF in vitro is 120 ng/mL.80 No toxic eﬀects were
obtained following exposure of ranibizumab to HUVECs and
ARPE-19 cells and up to a concentration of 2.5 mg/mL in the
MTS assay (section 3.7.1.1). In the ﬁrst hour, all preparations
released 2.21−35.7 μg/mL ranibizumab, and the maximum
concentration released was 44.2−207 μg/mL. Given that these
values are all above 120 ng/mL (and below 2.5 mg/mL) and
that ranibizumab released from all of the preparations was
shown to have maintained its activity (shown by SDS−PAGE
and the migration assay, sections 3.6 and 3.7.2.1), it can be
concluded that the released ranibizumab will elicit its
therapeutic eﬀect with no toxic eﬀects.
3.6. Analysis of the Structural Integrity of Ranibizu-
mab Released from PLGA Microparticles. Figure 10 shows
the structural integrity of native ranibizumab and ranibizumab
which has been released from the preparations. Native
ranibizumab showed a distinctive band at 23 kDa correspond-
ing to the reduction and cleavage of the disulﬁde bond between
the two chains of the Fab fragment.5 This band was also present
for ranibizumab released from all of the preparations, indicating
that the method of preparation and nanoparticles used did not
alter the structural integrity and aﬀect the stability of this
protein. The band smearing may be a result of the high salt
content from the release medium.
The band at 250 kDa present in the chitosan, chit/TPP, chit/
TPP-HA, and, to a lesser extent, CNAC and CNAC/TPP
preparations is likely attributed to the chitosan components of
the samples. This is because the release medium containing
ranibizumab also contained chitosan-based nanoparticles (MW
< 400 kDa). This is further conﬁrmed in another study which
used chitosan of MW (190−300 kDa) and tetanus toxoid (av
MW 176 kDa) to prepare protein-loaded chitosan/TPP
nanoparticles and also obtained a band at 250 kDa.81 The
released ranibizumab had maintained its stability, and this was
further conﬁrmed through maintained activity shown in the cell
migration assay (section 3.7.2.1).
3.7. Cell Studies. 3.7.1. Cell Viability. 3.7.1.1. MTS Assay.
Safety of ranibizumab (Figure 11A) and the nanoparticle-
within-microparticle preparations was assessed by evaluating
their eﬀects on mitochondrial activity of ARPE-19 cells (Figure
11B) and HUVECs (Figure 11C). A higher viability was
obtained in HUVECs compared to ARPE-19 across all of the
formulations and may be due to diﬀerences in cell sensitivities.
Ranibizumab was well tolerated in both cell lines up to
concentrations of 2.5 mg/mL (Figure 11A), higher than the
total concentration loaded in the microparticles. The
biocompatibility of PLGA is well established in in vitro82 and
in vivo83,84 studies with reported safe concentrations of up to 25
mg/mL.85 12.5 mg/mL of PLGA control was used in this study
and showed 80−109% cell viability across both cell lines.
Chitosan or CNAC preparations did not signiﬁcantly reduce
Figure 11. Eﬀect of ranibizumab (A) and system-within-system on the
viability of ARPE-19 cells (B) and HUVECs (C). The cell viability was
assessed using the MTS assay following a 24 h exposure to
ranibizumab. Data are presented as the mean ± SD, n = 9. Error
bars show the standard deviation. Abbreviations: chit/TPP, chitosan/
tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyalur-
onic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chito-
san-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2933

the cell viability in both cell lines compared to control (p = 0.15
and 0.07, respectively). Chitosan has been shown to have
diﬀerent safety proﬁles, varying with the type, MW, zeta
potential of the chitosan, or the cell type used.86−89 There was
also no signiﬁcant diﬀerence on cell viability between CNAC
and chitosan (p = 0.56) or CNAC/TPP (p = 0.95). The
addition of HA did not inﬂuence the cell viability signiﬁcantly
(p = 0.79), as reported in recent studies.90
3.7.1.2. Live/Dead Assay. The Live/Dead cell viability assay
was conducted to provide a qualitative conﬁrmation for the
MTS viability assay as well as to show the eﬀects, if any, of the
drug delivery systems on the morphology of HUVECs (Figure
12A) and ARPE-19 cells (Figure 12B).91 Untreated ARPE-19
cells (positive controls, ﬂuorescently labeled green) have a
cobblestone-like morphology with tight intercellular junc-
tions.91−93 HUVECs have a more spaced distribution with
cobblestone-like appearance.94,95 Dead cells appear ﬂuores-
cently labeled red. The proportion of viable cells reﬂects the
ﬁndings from the MTS assay with no morphological changes
observed across the HUVECs for any of the preparations.
Figure 12. Live/Dead micrographs for HUVECs (A) and ARPE-19 cells (B) exposed to 25 mg/mL native ranibizumab and 12.5 mg/mL empty
PLGA microparticles. Green ﬂuorescence indicates living cells, while red ﬂuorescence indicates dead cells. Controls used were media-treated cells
(positive control) and cells treated with 1% Triton-X (negative control). Abbreviations: chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA,
chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2934

However, ARPE-19 cells exposed to PLGA microparticles
containing chitosan, CNAC, and CNAC/TPP nanoparticles
showed a more scattered appearance. This could be secondary
to a loss of tight cell junctions which has been reported with
chitosan as a result of induction and redistribution of
cytoskeletal F-actin and tight junction protein Zona occludens
(ZO-1).96 NAC has recently been reported to cause
disassembly of the actin cytoskeleton,97 and therefore, this
may also contribute to the loss of tight junctions.
3.7.2. Assessment of Antiangiogenic Activity. VEGF
stimulates angiogenesis via multiple cellular pathways including
endothelial cell migration,40 proliferation40and capillary tube
formation.40,98 Ranibizumab acts by binding to VEGF and
inhibiting these eﬀects.80,99 Therefore, ranibizumab released
from the preparations was analyzed for antiangiogenic activity
using VEGF-induced cell migration and capillary-like tubule
formation assays. Further, chitosan-based nanoparticles which
were found to elicit an antiangiogenic eﬀect were further
assessed using the capillary-like tubule formation assay.
3.7.2.1. Eﬀect of Ranibizumab Released from PLGA
Microparticles on Endothelial Cell Migration. The aim of
the migration assay was to investigate if the method of
preparation, the use of chitosan-based particles, and release
process from the delivery systems aﬀect the activity of
ranibizumab. The eﬀect of ranibizumab, released from the
prepared PLGA microparticles, on the VEGF-induced cell
migration is shown in Figure 13. A qualitative depiction of
these results is shown in Figure 14. Native ranibizumab showed
an approximately 5-fold decrease in VEGF-induced migration,
consistent with previous reports.100 Ranibizumab released from
Figure 13. HUVEC migration for cells exposed to VEGF/FBS 10% (V/F), VEGF/FBS 10% plus native ranibizumab (r), and ranibizumab released
from PLGA (A), PLGA + CNAC (B), PLGA + CNAC/TPP (C), PLGA + chitosan (D), PLGA + chit/TPP (E), and PLGA + chit/TPP-HA (F).
Results are expressed as the number of cells exposed to ranibizumab per visual ﬁeld (mean ± SD, n = 6) as a percentage of VEGF-stimulated
migration. Error bars show the standard deviation. Abbreviations: FBS, fetal bovine serum; chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA,
chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Figure 14. Light micrographs showing migrated HUVECs for untreated cells (2% FBS) and cells exposed to VEGF/FBS 10% (V/F), native
ranibizumab (r), and ranibizumab released from PLGA microparticles (A), PLGA + chitosan (B), PLGA + chit/TPP (C), PLGA + chit/TPP-HA
(D), PLGA + CNAC (E), and PLGA + CNAC/TPP (F). Abbreviations: FBS, fetal bovine serum; chit/TPP, chitosan/tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-
HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid; CNAC, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine; CNAC/TPP, chitosan-N-acetyl-L-cysteine/tripolyphosphate.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2935

the PLGA control particles showed a similar outcome (p = 0.9)
indicating that entrapment and release did not alter the activity
of this protein signiﬁcantly. This is in agreement with the SDS−
PAGE ﬁndings (section 3.6) showing preserved structural
integrity of the released protein. Studies utilizing PLGA for
hydrophilic drug delivery have reported both maintained
activity8,101,102 and reduced protein stability10,103,104 which
result from diﬀerences in process parameters and the
hydrophilic agent used. Ranibizumab released from PLGA
microparticles containing CNAC and CNAC/TPP showed a
slightly higher antimigratory activity compared to ranibizumab
released from control (p = 0.16 and 0.4, respectively). The
NAC component may have contributed to this as it has
previously been shown to inhibit VEGF-induced HUVEC
tubule formation.105 It may be postulated that this eﬀect is
secondary to disulﬁde interactions between the cysteine groups
of NAC and VEGF,29 however, future studies should be
conducted to conﬁrm this. Further, NAC has been associated
with antiangiogenic activity in various other studies.30 There
was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the antimigratory eﬀects
of CNAC and CNAC/TPP (p = 0.91), suggesting that
complexation of CNAC with TPP does not inﬂuence the
eﬀect caused.
Chitosan and chit/TPP nanoparticles (Figures 13D and 13E,
respectively) did not enhance the antimigratory activity of
ranibizumab opposing the enhanced antiangiogenic eﬀect
obtained in the capillary-like tubule formation assay (section
3.7.2.2). The activity of chitosan with respect to cell migration
is not yet fully understood, with studies reporting either
promigratory or antimigratory eﬀects.20,106,107 However, the
diﬀerence in the antiangiogenic activity between the two assays
may be due to two reasons. The ﬁrst is a cell-speciﬁc eﬀect, as
the capillary-like tubule formation assay has additional human
dermal ﬁbroblasts and chitosan has been shown to inhibit
tubule formation secondary to matrix metalloproteinase-2
inhibition in this cell line.18 Another possible explanation is
that this assay considers the later stages of the angiogenic
process which the migration assay does not take into
account.108 However, ranibizumab in the chit/TPP-HA-
containing (Figure 13A) preparation showed signiﬁcantly
higher antimigratory activity compared to the control (p =
6.51 × 10−7) (Figure 13F), which was in line with the results of
the capillary-like tubule formation assay (section 3.7.2.2). The
antimigratory eﬀect could be associated with the HA
component of the nanoparticles and is in line with a previous
study.109 Another recent study110 showed a dose dependent
inhibition, with 50% inhibition of migration with HA
concentrations as low as 25 μg/mL. Although the concen-
tration of chit/TPP-HA (or chit/TPP) nanoparticles released
with ranibizumab was not quantiﬁed, the initial concentration
used, assuming nothing was lost, was 625 μg/mL of this
biocompatible polymer, therefore only 4% of this preparation
was required to have an eﬀect. Figure 14 shows light
micrographs of migrated HUVECs, stained with crystal violet
representing a qualitative depiction of the results discussed. As
chit/TPP-HA showed the highest antimigratory activity, it was
taken forward, together with its controls (chitosan and chit/
TPP), to conﬁrm antiangiogenic activity using a diﬀerent assay,
i.e., capillary-like tubule formation assay.
3.7.2.2. Eﬀect of Released Chitosan and Chit/TPP Particles
with or without Ranibizumab on Capillary-like Tubule
Formation. Chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles showed the most
signiﬁcant eﬀect in the migration study. Therefore, empty and
ranibizumab-containing chit/TPP-HA and chit/TPP nano-
particles were assessed for their inhibitory eﬀect, if any, on
VEGF-induced tubule growth (Figure 15). Suramin standard,
an inhibitor of tubule growth, caused 93 ± 0.3% tubule length
inhibition, which was similar to a recent study, reporting 90%
inhibition.111 Native ranibizumab has been shown to cause a
50−70% inhibition of tubule formation at a therapeutic
concentration of 125−200 μg/mL.100,112,113 This is similar to
the ranibizumab used in this study showing an inhibition of 61
± 4.5%. Empty chit/TPP nanoparticles caused a 30 ± 1.2%
inhibition, which more than doubled with the addition of
ranibizumab showing a statistically signiﬁcant (p = 3.73 × 10−3)
improvement in VEGF-mediated antiangiogenic activity for the
ranibizumab-loaded nanoparticles. The antiangiogenic activity
of chit/TPP nanoparticles may be due to their inﬂuence on
VEGFR-2 levels in human dermal ﬁbroblasts, as recently
reported.16 The empty chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles caused a
higher inhibition of tubule growth relative to chit/TPP
nanoparticles (p = 6.09 × 10−4). This is in agreement with
previous studies which have demonstrated antiangiogenic
activity following exposure to high MW HA.25,114 The addition
of ranibizumab to these nanoparticles demonstrated a higher
inhibition relative to the chit/TPP-containing ranibizumab and
Figure 15. Eﬀects of empty and ranibizumab-containing chit/TPP and chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles on cell tubule length inhibition relative to VEGF-
treated cells. Data are presented as the mean ± SD, n = 3. Error bars show the standard deviation. Abbreviations: r, ranibizumab; chit/TPP, chitosan/
tripolyphosphate; chit/TPP-HA, chitosan/tripolyphosphate-hyaluronic acid.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2936

native ranibizumab alone (76 ± 4.6% compared to 66 ± 3.5%
and 61 ± 4.5%, respectively) and is in line with the migration
assay ﬁndings.
4. CONCLUSION
The standard of care for the most prevalent macular diseases,
including wet AMD, diabetic macular edema, and retinal vein
occlusion, necessitates relatively frequent IVT injections, owing
to the short intravitreal half-lives of the therapeutic proteins:
ranibizumab, bevacizumab, and aﬂibercept. There is an unmet
need for the development of a drug delivery system with a high
entrapment eﬃciency and slow release of these agents. PLGA
microparticles present a suitable platform for intravitreal
delivery of ranibizumab as they are biodegradable, have a safe
ocular proﬁle, and have been FDA-approved for the sustained
intravitreal delivery of dexamethasone (Ozurdex). However,
these microparticles are commonly associated with poor
protein loading, loss of protein stability, and an initial burst
release, which other studies have attempted to overcome by
altering the process parameters but have not succeeded in
addressing all factors collectively.
Our study analyzed the eﬀects of incorporating chitosan-
based nanoparticles containing ranibizumab within the PLGA
microparticles on the loading, stability, activity, and release of
the ranibizumab, as well as their eﬀects on the physicochemical
properties of the PLGA microparticles. PLGA microparticles
containing CNAC nanoparticles signiﬁcantly improved ranibi-
zumab loading, avoiding the initial burst release and having a
favorable prolonged release proﬁle. These eﬀects were perhaps
related to the NAC group present in the chitosan derivative and
may be a result of the thiol interaction between the cysteine
residues of NAC and ranibizumab. However, more studies are
required to further investigate this. PLGA microparticles
containing the CNAC nanoparticles provide a possible platform
for sustained intravitreal delivery of ranibizumab, potentially
reducing the frequency of IVT and the burden of care.
Complexation of chitosan or CNAC with TPP increased the
rate of release signiﬁcantly. Therefore, these can be used to
provide an immediate therapeutic eﬀect of an intravitreal
protein. Chit/TPP-HA nanoparticles showed enhanced anti-
angiogenic activity (enhanced antimigratory activity and
inhibition of capillary tube formation) due to the HA
component. However, PLGA microparticles containing these
nanoparticles showed the fastest rate of degradation, providing
a platform for immediate drug release.
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: naba_elsaid@hotmail.com. Tel: +44(0)1707 285114.
*E-mail: s.somavarapu@ucl.ac.uk. Tel: +44(0)207 753 5987.
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Dr. Paul Stapleton and David McCarthy for
their assistance in the Live/Dead, TEM, and SEM procedures.
We wish to also thank Robert Petrarca and Tasneem Kapadia
for their contribution in the preliminary studies. This study was
supported by King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
Clinical Research and Development Investment Scheme, Grant
No. 513843. T.L.J. received research grant support from
NeoVista, Novartis, and Oraya for unrelated projects. He has
served as an advisor to Alcon, Bausch & Lomb, Thrombogenics
and Allimera, but received no commercial support in relation to
the work presented herein.
■REFERENCES
(1) Bunce, C.; Zekite, A.; Walton, S.; Rees, A.; Patel, P. J.
Certifications for sight impairment due to age related macular
degeneration in England. Public Health 2015, 129, 138−42.
(2) NICE. Ranibizumab and pegaptanib for the treatment of age-related
macular degeneration: NICE technology appraisal guidance [TA155].
2008 [16/05/2016]. Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ta155/chapter/2-Clinical-need-and-practice.
(3) Bakri, S. J.; Snyder, M. R.; Reid, J. M.; Pulido, J. S.; Ezzat, M. K.;
Singh, R. J. Pharmacokinetics of intravitreal ranibizumab (Lucentis).
Ophthalmology 2007, 114, 2179−82.
(4) Sampat, K. M.; Garg, S. J. Complications of intravitreal injections.
Curr. Opin Ophthalmol. 2010, 21, 178−83.
(5) Grisanti, S.; Tura, A. [Qualitative differences between
ranibizumab from original and ready to use syringes]. Ophthalmologe
2010, 107, 1123−32.
(6) Kahook, M. Y.; Liu, L.; Ruzycki, P.; Mandava, N.; Carpenter, J.
F.; Petrash, J. M.; Ammar, D. A. High-molecular-weight aggregates in
repackaged bevacizumab. Retina 2010, 30, 887−92.
(7) Ye, M.; Kim, S.; Park, K. Issues in long-term protein delivery
using biodegradable microparticles. J. Controlled Release 2010, 146,
241−60.
(8) Shelke, N. B.; Kadam, R.; Tyagi, P.; Rao, V. R.; Kompella, U. B.
Intravitreal Poly(L-lactide) Microparticles Sustain Retinal and
Choroidal Delivery of TG-0054, a Hydrophilic Drug Intended for
Neovascular Diseases. Drug Delivery Transl. Res. 2011, 1, 76−90.
(9) Yandrapu, S. K.; Upadhyay, A. K.; Petrash, J. M.; Kompella, U. B.
Nanoparticles in porous microparticles prepared by supercritical
infusion and pressure quench technology for sustained delivery of
bevacizumab. Mol. Pharmaceutics 2013, 10, 4676−86.
(10) van de Weert, M.; Hennink, W. E.; Jiskoot, W. Protein
instability in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) microparticles. Pharm. Res.
2000, 17, 1159−67.
(11) Allison, S. D. Analysis of initial burst in PLGA microparticles.
Expert Opin. Drug Delivery 2008, 5, 615−28.
(12) Hong, X.; Wei, L.; Ma, L.; Chen, Y.; Liu, Z.; Yuan, W. Novel
preparation method for sustained-release PLGA microspheres using
water-in-oil-in-hydrophilic-oil-in-water emulsion. Int. J. Nanomed.
2013, 8, 2433−41.
(13) Mao, S.; Xu, J.; Cai, C.; Germershaus, O.; Schaper, A.; Kissel, T.
Effect of WOW process parameters on morphology and burst release
of FITC-dextran loaded PLGA microspheres. Int. J. Pharm. 2007, 334,
137−48.
(14) Hua, F. J.; Kim, G. E.; Lee, J. D.; Son, Y. K.; Lee, D. S.
Macroporous poly(L-lactide) scaffold 1. Preparation of a macroporous
scaffold by liquid–liquid phase separation of a PLLA–dioxane–water
system. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 2002, 63, 161−7.
(15) Harish Prashanth, K. V.; Tharanathan, R. N. Depolymerized
products of chitosan as potent inhibitors of tumor-induced angio-
genesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 2005, 1722, 22−9.
(16) Xu, Y.; Wen, Z.; Xu, Z. Chitosan nanoparticles inhibit the
growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma xenografts through an
antiangiogenic mechanism. Anticancer Res. 2009, 29, 5103−9.
(17) Okamoto, H.; Umeda, S.; Obazawa, M.; Minami, M.; Noda, T.;
Mizota, A.; Honda, M.; Tanaka, M.; Koyama, R.; Takagi, I.; Sakamoto,
Y.; Saito, Y.; Miyake, Y.; Iwata, T. Complement factor H poly-
morphisms in Japanese population with age-related macular
degeneration. Mol. Vis. 2006, 12, 156−8.
(18) Kim, M. M.; Kim, S. K. Chitooligosaccharides inhibit activation
and expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 in human dermal
fibroblasts. FEBS Lett. 2006, 580, 2661−6.
(19) Liu, H.-t.; Huang, P.; Ma, P.; Liu, Q.-s.; Yu, C.; Du, Y.-g.
Chitosan oligosaccharides suppress LPS-induced IL-8 expression in
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2937

human umbilical vein endothelial cells through blockade of p38 and
Akt protein kinases. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 2011, 32, 478−86.
(20) Kievit, F. M.; Cooper, A.; Jana, S.; Leung, M. C.; Wang, K.;
Edmondson, D.; Wood, D.; Lee, J. S.; Ellenbogen, R. G.; Zhang, M.
Aligned chitosan-polycaprolactone polyblend nanofibers promote the
migration of glioblastoma cells. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2013, 2, 1651−
9.
(21) McBane, J. E.; Vulesevic, B.; Padavan, D. T.; McEwan, K. A.;
Korbutt, G. S.; Suuronen, E. J. Evaluation of a collagen-chitosan
hydrogel for potential use as a pro-angiogenic site for islet
transplantation. PLoS One 2013, 8, e77538.
(22) Miklas, J. W.; Dallabrida, S. M.; Reis, L. A.; Ismail, N.; Rupnick,
M.; Radisic, M. QHREDGS enhances tube formation, metabolism and
survival of endothelial cells in collagen-chitosan hydrogels. PLoS One
2013, 8, e72956.
(23) Kogan, G.; Soltes, L.; Stern, R.; Gemeiner, P. Hyaluronic acid: a
natural biopolymer with a broad range of biomedical and industrial
applications. Biotechnol. Lett. 2007, 29, 17−25.
(24) Oh, E. J.; Park, K.; Kim, K. S.; Kim, J.; Yang, J. A.; Kong, J. H.;
Lee, M. Y.; Hoffman, A. S.; Hahn, S. K. Target specific and long-acting
delivery of protein, peptide, and nucleotide therapeutics using
hyaluronic acid derivatives. J. Controlled Release 2010, 141, 2−12.
(25) Rooney, P.; Kumar, S. Inverse relationship between hyaluronan
and collagens in development and angiogenesis. Differentiation 1993,
54, 1−9.
(26) Nasti, A.; Zaki, N. M.; de Leonardis, P.; Ungphaiboon, S.;
Sansongsak, P.; Rimoli, M. G.; Tirelli, N. Chitosan/TPP and chitosan/
TPP-hyaluronic acid nanoparticles: systematic optimization of the
preparative process and preliminary biological evaluation. Pharm. Res.
2009, 26, 1918−30.
(27) Bernkop-Schnurch, A.; Hornof, M.; Guggi, D. Thiolated
chitosans. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2004, 57, 9−17.
(28) EMEA; European Medicines Evaluation Agency (2007).
Scientiﬁc discussion. Available URL http://www.ema.europa.eu/
docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Scientiﬁc_Discussion/
human/000715/WC500043550.pdf [Cited: 13.11.14].
(29) Hoeben, A.; Landuyt, B.; Highley, M. S.; Wildiers, H.; Van
Oosterom, A. T.; De Bruijn, E. A. Vascular endothelial growth factor
and angiogenesis. Pharmacol Rev. 2004, 56, 549−80.
(30) Aluigi, M. G.; De Flora, S.; D’Agostini, F.; Albini, A.; Fassina, G.
Antiapoptotic and antigenotoxic effects of N-acetylcysteine in human
cells of endothelial origin. Anticancer Res. 2000, 20, 3183−7.
(31) de Oliveira Dias, J. R.; Rodrigues, E. B.; Maia, M.; Magalhaes,
O., Jr.; Penha, F. M.; Farah, M. E. Cytokines in neovascular age-related
macular degeneration: fundamentals of targeted combination therapy.
Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2011, 95, 1631−7.
(32) Calvo, P.; Vila-Jato, J. L.; Alonso, M.a.J. Evaluation of cationic
polymer-coated nanocapsules as ocular drug carriers. Int. J. Pharm.
1997, 153, 41−50.
(33) Schmitz, T.; Grabovac, V.; Palmberger, T. F.; Hoffer, M. H.;
Bernkop-Schnurch, A. Synthesis and characterization of a chitosan-N-
acetyl cysteine conjugate. Int. J. Pharm. 2008, 347, 79−85.
(34) Ghasemian, E.; Vatanara, A.; Rouholamini Najafabadi, A.;
Rouini, M. R.; Gilani, K.; Darabi, M. Preparation, characterization and
optimization of sildenafil citrate loaded PLGA nanoparticles by
statistical factorial design. Daru, J. Pharm. Sci. 2013, 21, 68.
(35) Li, F.; Hurley, B.; Liu, Y.; Leonard, B.; Griffith, M. Controlled
release of bevacizumab through nanospheres for extended treatment of
age-related macular degeneration. Open Ophthalmol. J. 2012, 6, 54−8.
(36) Chereddy, K. K.; Her, C. H.; Comune, M.; Moia, C.; Lopes, A.;
Porporato, P. E.; Vanacker, J.; Lam, M. C.; Steinstraesser, L.;
Sonveaux, P.; Zhu, H.; Ferreira, L. S.; Vandermeulen, G.; Preat, V.
PLGA nanoparticles loaded with host defense peptide LL37 promote
wound healing. J. Controlled Release 2014, 194, 138−47.
(37) D’Souza, S. S.; DeLuca, P. P. Methods to assess in vitro drug
release from injectable polymeric particulate systems. Pharm. Res.
2006, 23, 460−74.
(38) Liu, F.; Merchant, H. A.; Kulkarni, R. P.; Alkademi, M.; Basit, A.
W. Evolution of a physiological pH 6.8 bicarbonate buffer system:
application to the dissolution testing of enteric coated products. Eur. J.
Pharm. Biopharm. 2011, 78, 151−7.
(39) Kaja, S.; Hilgenberg, J. D.; Everett, E.; Olitsky, S. E.; Gossage, J.;
Koulen, P. Effects of dilution and prolonged storage with preservative
in a polyethylene container on Bevacizumab (Avastin) for topical
delivery as a nasal spray in anti-hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
and related therapies. Hum. Antibodies 2011, 20, 95−101.
(40) Folkman, J.; Klagsbrun, M. Angiogenic factors. Science 1987,
235, 442−7.
(41) Hotchkiss, K. A.; Ashton, A. W.; Mahmood, R.; Russell, R. G.;
Sparano, J. A.; Schwartz, E. L. Inhibition of endothelial cell function in
vitro and angiogenesis in vivo by docetaxel (Taxotere): association
with impaired repositioning of the microtubule organizing center. Mol.
Cancer Ther. 2002, 1, 1191−200.
(42) Hrynyk, M.; Martins-Green, M.; Barron, A. E.; Neufeld, R. J.
Sustained prolonged topical delivery of bioactive human insulin for
potential treatment of cutaneous wounds. Int. J. Pharm. 2010, 398,
146−54.
(43) Iriyama, A.; Fujiki, R.; Inoue, Y.; Takahashi, H.; Tamaki, Y.;
Takezawa, S.; Takeyama, K.; Jang, W. D.; Kato, S.; Yanagi, Y. A2E, a
pigment of the lipofuscin of retinal pigment epithelial cells, is an
endogenous ligand for retinoic acid receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 2008, 283,
11947−53.
(44) Yu, W.; Bai, Y.; Han, N.; Wang, F.; Zhao, M.; Huang, L.; Li, X.
Inhibition of pathological retinal neovascularization by semaphorin 3A.
Mol. Vis. 2013, 19, 1397−405.
(45) Wang, X.; Zheng, C.; Wu, Z.; Teng, D.; Zhang, X.; Wang, Z.; Li,
C. Chitosan-NAC nanoparticles as a vehicle for nasal absorption
enhancement of insulin. J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B 2009, 88B, 150−
61.
(46) Ponedel’kina, I. Y.; Odinokov, V. N.; Saitgalina, E. A.; Lukina, E.
S.; Dzhemilev, U. M. Conjugation of 3′-azido-3′-deoxythymidine with
heparin. Dokl. Chem. 2008, 419, 95−7.
(47) Lee, Y. S.; Johnson, P. J.; Robbins, P. T.; Bridson, R. H.
Production of nanoparticles-in-microparticles by a double emulsion
method: A comprehensive study. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2013, 83,
168−73.
(48) Wadhwa, S.; Paliwal, R.; Paliwal, S. R.; Vyas, S. P. Hyaluronic
acid modified chitosan nanoparticles for effective management of
glaucoma: development, characterization, and evaluation. Journal of
Drug Targeting. 2010, 18, 292−302.
(49) Luangtana-anan, M.; Opanasopit, P.; Ngawhirunpat, T.;
Nunthanid, J.; Sriamornsak, P.; Limmatvapirat, S.; Lim, L. Y. Effect
of chitosan salts and molecular weight on a nanoparticulate carrier for
therapeutic protein. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 2005, 10, 189−96.
(50) Talaei, F.; Azizi, E.; Dinarvand, R.; Atyabi, F. Thiolated chitosan
nanoparticles as a delivery system for antisense therapy: evaluation
against EGFR in T47D breast cancer cells. Int. J. Nanomed. 2011, 6,
1963−75.
(51) Hombach, J.; Hoyer, H.; Bernkop-Schnurch, A. Thiolated
chitosans: development and in vitro evaluation of an oral tobramycin
sulphate delivery system. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2008, 33, 1−8.
(52) Parajo, Y.; D’Angelo, I.; Welle, A.; Garcia-Fuentes, M.; Alonso,
M. J. Hyaluronic acid/Chitosan nanoparticles as delivery vehicles for
VEGF and PDGF-BB. Drug Delivery 2010, 17, 596−604.
(53) de la Fuente, M.; Seijo, B.; Alonso, M. J. Novel hyaluronic acid-
chitosan nanoparticles for ocular gene therapy. Invest. Ophthalmol.
Visual Sci. 2008, 49, 2016−24.
(54) Wen, H.; Hao, J.; Li, S. K. Characterization of human sclera
barrier properties for transscleral delivery of bevacizumab and
ranibizumab. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013, 102, 892−903.
(55) Janes, K. A.; Calvo, P.; Alonso, M. J. Polysaccharide colloidal
particles as delivery systems for macromolecules. Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 2001, 47, 83−97.
(56) Pan, Y.; Li, Y. J.; Zhao, H. Y.; Zheng, J. M.; Xu, H.; Wei, G.;
Hao, J. S.; Cui, F. D. Bioadhesive polysaccharide in protein delivery
system: chitosan nanoparticles improve the intestinal absorption of
insulin in vivo. Int. J. Pharm. 2002, 249, 139−47.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2938

(57) Qi, L.; Xu, Z.; Jiang, X.; Hu, C.; Zou, X. Preparation and
antibacterial activity of chitosan nanoparticles. Carbohydr. Res. 2004,
339, 2693−700.
(58) Aktaş, Y.; Andrieux, K.; Alonso, M. J.; Calvo, P.; Gürsoy, R. N.;
Couvreur, P.; Çapan, Y. Preparation and in vitro evaluation of chitosan
nanoparticles containing a caspase inhibitor. Int. J. Pharm. 2005, 298,
378−83.
(59) Ferlay, J.; Parkin, D. M.; Steliarova-Foucher, E. Estimates of
cancer incidence and mortality in Europe in 2008. Eur. J. Cancer 2010,
46, 765−81.
(60) Mohammadpour Dounighi, N.; Eskandari, R.; Avadi, M.;
Zolfagharian, H.; Mir Mohammad Sadeghi, A.; Rezayat, M.
Preparation and in vitro characterization of chitosan nanoparticles
containing Mesobuthus eupeus scorpion venom as an antigen delivery
system. J. Venomous Anim. Toxins Incl. Trop. Dis. 2012, 18, 44−52.
(61) Silverstein, R. M.; Bassler, G. C.; Morrill, T. C. Spectrometric
Identiﬁcation of Organic Compounds; John Wiley and Sons: New York,
1981.
(62) Mi, F.-L.; Shyu, S.-S.; Wong, T.-B.; Jang, S.-F.; Lee, S.-T.; Lu, K.-
T. Chitosan−polyelectrolyte complexation for the preparation of gel
beads and controlled release of anticancer drug. II. Effect of pH-
dependent ionic crosslinking or interpolymer complex using
tripolyphosphate or polyphosphate as reagent. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.
1999, 74, 1093−107.
(63) Yang, M.-H.; Jong, S.-B.; Lu, C.-Y.; Lin, Y.-F.; Chiang, P.-W.;
Tyan, Y.-C.; Chung, T.-W. Assessing the responses of cellular proteins
induced by hyaluronic acid-modified surfaces utilizing a mass
spectrometry-based profiling system: Over-expression of CD36,
CD44, CDK9, and PP2A. Analyst 2012, 137, 4921−33.
(64) Oliveira, R. C.; Messias, A.; Siqueira, R. C.; Bonini-Filho, M. A.;
Haddad, A.; Damico, F. M.; Maia-Filho, A.; Crispim, P. T.; Saliba, J. B.;
Ribeiro, J. A.; Scott, I. U.; Cunha-Jr, A. S.; Jorge, R. Vitreous
pharmacokinetics and retinal safety of intravitreal preserved versus
non-preserved triamcinolone acetonide in rabbit eyes. Curr. Eye Res.
2012, 37, 55−61.
(65) Murthy, R.; Khattar, H.; Singh, S. Formulation and character-
ization of nano lipid carrier dry powder inhaler containing
ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and N-acetyl cysteine. Int. J. Drug Delivery
2012, 4, 316−25.
(66) Hsieh, D. S.; Rhine, W. D.; Langer, R. Zero-order controlled-
release polymer matrices for micro- and macromolecules. J. Pharm. Sci.
1983, 72, 17−22.
(67) Chandy, T.; Das, G. S.; Rao, G. H. 5-Fluorouracil-loaded
chitosan coated polylactic acid microspheres as biodegradable drug
carriers for cerebral tumours. J. Microencapsulation 2000, 17, 625−38.
(68) Dhawan, S.; Singla, A. K. Nifedipine loaded chitosan
microspheres prepared by emulsification phase-separation. Biotech.
Histochem. 2003, 78, 243−54.
(69) Liu, G.; Miao, X.; Fan, W.; Crawford, R. W.; Xiao, Y. Porous
PLGA microspheres effectively loaded with BSA protein by electro-
spraying combined with phase separation in liquid nitrogen. J.
Biomimetics, Biomater., Tissue Eng. 2010, 6, 1−18.
(70) Lian, H.; Zhang, T.; Sun, J.; Pu, X.; Tang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; He, Z.
Enhanced paracellular and transcellular paclitaxel permeation by
chitosan−vitamin E succinate−N-acetyl-l-cysteine copolymer on
Caco-2 cell monolayer. J. Nanopart. Res. 2014, 16, 1−16.
(71) Pieper, G. M.; Siebeneich, W. Oral administration of the
antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine, abrogates diabetes-induced endothelial
dysfunction. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 1998, 32, 101−5.
(72) Sturesson, C.; Carlfors, J. Incorporation of protein in PLG-
microspheres with retention of bioactivity. J. Controlled Release 2000,
67, 171−8.
(73) Ramchandani, M.; Robinson, D. In vitro and in vivo release of
ciprofloxacin from PLGA 50:50 implants. J. Controlled Release 1998,
54, 167−75.
(74) Amann, L. C.; Gandal, M. J.; Lin, R.; Liang, Y.; Siegel, S. J. In
vitro-in vivo correlations of scalable PLGA-risperidone implants for the
treatment of schizophrenia. Pharm. Res. 2010, 27, 1730−7.
(75) Murugeshu, A.; Astete, C.; Leonardi, C.; Morgan, T.; Sabliov, C.
M. Chitosan/PLGA particles for controlled release of alpha-tocopherol
in the GI tract via oral administration. Nanomedicine (London, U. K.)
2011, 6, 1513−28.
(76) Jain, G. K.; Pathan, S. A.; Akhter, S.; Ahmad, N.; Jain, N.;
Talegaonkar, S.; Khar, R. K.; Ahmad, F. J. Mechanistic study of
hydrolytic erosion and drug release behaviour of PLGA nanoparticles:
Influence of chitosan. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2010, 95, 2360−6.
(77) Wang, Y.; Li, P.; Kong, L. Chitosan-modified PLGA
nanoparticles with versatile surface for improved drug delivery.
AAPS PharmSciTech 2013, 14, 585−92.
(78) Lee, E. S.; Kwon, M. J.; Lee, H.; Na, K.; Kim, J. J. In vitro study
of lysozyme in poly(lactide-co-glycolide) microspheres with sucrose
acetate isobutyrate. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2006, 29, 435−41.
(79) Bouissou, C.; Rouse, J. J.; Price, R.; van der Walle, C. F. The
influence of surfactant on PLGA microsphere glass transition and
water sorption: remodeling the surface morphology to attenuate the
burst release. Pharm. Res. 2006, 23, 1295−305.
(80) Klettner, A.; Roider, J. Comparison of bevacizumab,
ranibizumab, and pegaptanib in vitro: efficiency and possible additional
pathways. Invest. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 2008, 49, 4523−7.
(81) Harde, H.; Agrawal, A. K.; Jain, S. Tetanus toxoids loaded
glucomannosylated chitosan based nanohoming vaccine adjuvant with
improved oral stability and immunostimulatory response. Pharm. Res.
2015, 32, 122−34.
(82) Anderson, J. M.; Shive, M. S. Biodegradation and biocompat-
ibility of PLA and PLGA microspheres. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 1997,
28, 5−24.
(83) Semete, B.; Booysen, L.; Lemmer, Y.; Kalombo, L.; Katata, L.;
Verschoor, J.; Swai, H. S. In vivo evaluation of the biodistribution and
safety of PLGA nanoparticles as drug delivery systems. Nanomedicine
2010, 6, 662−71.
(84) Souza, M. C.; Fialho, S. L.; Souza, P. A.; Fulgencio, G. O.; Da
Silva, G. R.; Silva-Cunha, A. Tacrolimus-loaded PLGA implants: in
vivo release and ocular toxicity. Curr. Eye Res. 2014, 39, 99−102.
(85) Yang, H.; Yang, L.; Wang, L.; Diao, Y. Preparation of Aptamer-
Nanomicrocapsule Using Nanoprecipitation Method. Int. J. Adv.
Comput. Technol. 2013, 5, 585.
(86) Grenha, A.; Grainger, C. I.; Dailey, L. A.; Seijo, B.; Martin, G. P.;
Remuñán-López, C.; Forbes, B. Chitosan nanoparticles are compatible
with respiratory epithelial cells in vitro. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2007, 31,
73−84.
(87) Manca, M.-L.; Mourtas, S.; Dracopoulos, V.; Fadda, A. M.;
Antimisiaris, S. G. PLGA, chitosan or chitosan-coated PLGA
microparticles for alveolar delivery?: A comparative study of particle
stability during nebulization. Colloids Surf., B 2008, 62, 220−31.
(88) Zhu, X.; Su, M.; Tang, S.; Wang, L.; Liang, X.; Meng, F.; Hong,
Y.; Xu, Z. Synthesis of thiolated chitosan and preparation nanoparticles
with sodium alginate for ocular drug delivery. Mol. Vis. 2012, 18,
1973−82.
(89) Wang, Q.; Liu, P.; Liu, P.; Gong, T.; Li, S.; Duan, Y.; Zhang, Z.
Preparation, blood coagulation and cell compatibility evaluation of
chitosan-graft-polylactide copolymers. Biomed. Mater. 2014, 9, 015007.
(90) Kageyama, T.; Kakegawa, T.; Osaki, T.; Enomoto, J.; Ito, T.;
Nittami, T.; Fukuda, J. Rapid engineering of endothelial cell-lined
vascular-like structures in in situ crosslinkable hydrogels. Biofabrication
2014, 6, 025006.
(91) Giebel, S. J.; Menicucci, G.; McGuire, P. G.; Das, A. Matrix
metalloproteinases in early diabetic retinopathy and their role in
alteration of the blood-retinal barrier. Lab. Invest. 2005, 85, 597−607.
(92) Dunn, K. C.; Aotaki-Keen, A. E.; Putkey, F. R.; Hjelmeland, L.
M. ARPE-19, a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line with
differentiated properties. Exp. Eye Res. 1996, 62, 155−69.
(93) Hornof, M.; Toropainen, E.; Urtti, A. Cell culture models of the
ocular barriers. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2005, 60, 207−25.
(94) Feng, L.; Kienitz, B. A.; Matsumoto, C.; Bruce, J.; Sisti, M.;
Duong, H.; Pile-Spellman, J. Feasibility of using hyperosmolar
mannitol as a liquid tumor embolization agent. AJNR Am. J.
Neuroradiol. 2005, 26, 1405−12.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2939

(95) van der Meer, A. D.; Vermeul, K.; Poot, A. A.; Feijen, J.; Vermes,
I. A microfluidic wound-healing assay for quantifying endothelial cell
migration. AJP: Heart Circ. Physiol. 2010, 298, H719−H725.
(96) Schipper, N. G.; Olsson, S.; Hoogstraate, J. A.; deBoer, A. G.;
Varum, K. M.; Artursson, P. Chitosans as absorption enhancers for
poorly absorbable drugs 2: mechanism of absorption enhancement.
Pharm. Res. 1997, 14, 923−9.
(97) Bozhokina, E.; Vakhromova, E.; Gamaley, I.; Khaitlina, S. N-
acetylcysteine increases susceptibility of HeLa cells to bacterial
invasion. J. Cell. Biochem. 2013, 114, 1568−74.
(98) Folkman, J. Tumor angiogenesis. Adv. Cancer Res. 1985, 43,
175−203.
(99) Ferrara, N.; Damico, L.; Shams, N.; Lowman, H.; Kim, R.
Development of ranibizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor antigen binding fragment, as therapy for neovascular age-related
macular degeneration. Retina 2006, 26, 859−70.
(100) Costa, R.; Carneiro, A.; Rocha, A.; Pirraco, A.; Falcao, M.;
Vasques, L.; Soares, R. Bevacizumab and ranibizumab on micro-
vascular endothelial cells: A comparative study. J. Cell. Biochem. 2009,
108, 1410−7.
(101) Carrasquillo, K. G.; Ricker, J. A.; Rigas, I. K.; Miller, J. W.;
Gragoudas, E. S.; Adamis, A. P. Controlled delivery of the anti-VEGF
aptamer EYE001 with poly(lactic-co-glycolic)acid microspheres. Invest.
Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 2003, 44, 290−9.
(102) Pan, C. K.; Durairaj, C.; Kompella, U. B.; Agwu, O.; Oliver, S.
C.; Quiroz-Mercado, H.; Mandava, N.; Olson, J. L. Comparison of
long-acting bevacizumab formulations in the treatment of choroidal
neovascularization in a rat model. J. Ocul. Pharmacol. Ther. 2011, 27,
219−24.
(103) Lu, W.; Park, T. G. Protein release from poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) microspheres: protein stability problems. PDA J. Pharm. Sci.
Technol. 1995, 49, 13−9.
(104) Crotts, G.; Park, T. G. Protein delivery from poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) biodegradable microspheres: release kinetics and stability
issues. J. Microencapsulation 1998, 15, 699−713.
(105) Lin, M. T.; Yen, M. L.; Lin, C. Y.; Kuo, M. L. Inhibition of
vascular endothelial growth factor-induced angiogenesis by resveratrol
through interruption of Src-dependent vascular endothelial cadherin
tyrosine phosphorylation. Mol. Pharmacol. 2003, 64, 1029−36.
(106) Okamoto, Y.; Watanabe, M.; Miyatake, K.; Morimoto, M.;
Shigemasa, Y.; Minami, S. Effects of chitin/chitosan and their
oligomers/monomers on migrations of fibroblasts and vascular
endothelium. Biomaterials 2002, 23, 1975−9.
(107) Chen, Y. L.; Wang, C. Y.; Yang, F. Y.; Wang, B. S.; Chen, J. Y.;
Lin, L. T.; Leu, J. D.; Chiu, S. J.; Chen, F. D.; Lee, Y. J.; Chen, W. R.
Synergistic effects of glycated chitosan with high-intensity focused
ultrasound on suppression of metastases in a syngeneic breast tumor
model. Cell Death Dis. 2014, 5, e1178.
(108) Arnaoutova, I.; Kleinman, H. K. In vitro angiogenesis:
endothelial cell tube formation on gelled basement membrane extract.
Nat. Protoc. 2010, 5, 628−35.
(109) Jin, S. G.; Jeong, Y. I.; Jung, S.; Ryu, H. H.; Jin, Y. H.; Kim, I. Y.
The effect of hyaluronic Acid on the invasiveness of malignant glioma
cells: comparison of invasion potential at hyaluronic Acid hydrogel and
Matrigel. J. Korean Neurosurg. Soc. 2009, 46, 472−8.
(110) Ito, T.; Williams, J. D.; Al-Assaf, S.; Phillips, G. O.; Phillips, A.
O. Hyaluronan and proximal tubular cell migration. Kidney Int. 2004,
65, 823−33.
(111) Wang, Z.; Perez, M.; Caja, S.; Melino, G.; Johnson, T. S.;
Lindfors, K.; Griffin, M. A novel extracellular role for tissue
transglutaminase in matrix-bound VEGF-mediated angiogenesis. Cell
Death Dis. 2013, 4, e808.
(112) Carneiro, A.; Falcao, M.; Pirraco, A.; Milheiro-Oliveira, P.;
Falcao-Reis, F.; Soares, R. Comparative effects of bevacizumab,
ranibizumab and pegaptanib at intravitreal dose range on endothelial
cells. Exp. Eye Res. 2009, 88, 522−7.
(113) Medina, R. J.; O’Neill, C. L.; Devine, A. B.; Gardiner, T. A.;
Stitt, A. W. The Pleiotropic Effects of Simvastatin on Retinal
Microvascular Endothelium Has Important Implications for Ischaemic
Retinopathies. PLoS One 2008, 3, e2584.
(114) Feinberg, R. N.; Beebe, D. C. Hyaluronate in vasculogenesis.
Science 1983, 220, 1177−9.
Molecular Pharmaceutics
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00335
Mol. Pharmaceutics 2016, 13, 2923−2940
2940