Nanomedicine
ISSN: 1743-5889 (Print) 1748-6963 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/innm20
In Vitro IFN-α Release From IFN-α- and Pegylated
IFN-α-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
and Pegylated poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
Nanoparticles
Tivadar Feczkó, Andrea Fodor-Kardos, Muttuswamy Sivakumaran & Quazi
Tanminul Haque Shubhra
To cite this article: Tivadar Feczkó, Andrea Fodor-Kardos, Muttuswamy Sivakumaran & Quazi
Tanminul Haque Shubhra (2016)  In Vitro IFN-α Release From IFN-α- and Pegylated IFN-α-
loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) and Pegylated poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) Nanoparticles,
Nanomedicine, 11:16, 2029-2034, DOI: 10.2217/nnm-2016-0058
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.2217/nnm-2016-0058
Published online: 27 Jul 2016.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 187
View related articles
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 11 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=innm20

2029
Nanomedicine (Lond.) (2016) 11(16), 2029–2034
ISSN 1743-5889
part of
Preliminary Communication
10.2217/nnm-2016-0058 © 2016 Future Medicine Ltd

Aim: Interferon alpha (IFN-α) controlled release of nanoparticles was investigated
under in vitro conditions. Materials & methods: IFN-α and pegylated IFN-α (PEG-
IFN-α) were encapsulated by poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) and pegylated PLGA
(PEG-PLGA) copolymers using double emulsion solvent evaporation method. Results:
The size of resulting four nanoparticles (IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acids), IFN-α
in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol, PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acids) and PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol) was below
130 nm diameter. IFN-α encapsulation efficiency of the nanoparticles was between
78 and 91%. Conclusion: The in vitro drug release studies conducted in phosphate-
buffered saline and human plasma highlighted the role of incubation medium on
the IFN release from the nanoparticles. The PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-
polyethylene glycol was the most promising nanoparticle among the four formulations
because of its remarkably constant release in both phosphate-buffered saline and
plasma.
First draft submitted: 18 February 2016; Accepted for publication: 29 June 2016;
Published online: 27 July 2016
Keywords: IFN-α • in vitro release • nanoparticles
IFN-α is a cytokine produced by leukocytes
upon exposure to viruses, mitogens, tumor
cells or foreign cells. IFN-α shows immu-
nomodulating, growth inhibitory, antiviral
and antitumor activities [1]. IFN-α is widely
used in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B,
chronic hepatitis C, condylomata acuminata
and several malignant neoplasms including
AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma, hairy-cell
leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, follicu-
lar lymphoma, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma,
carcinoid
tumors,
melanoma,
multiple
myeloma and renal cell carcinoma [2].
While IFN-α has great potential as a
potent antiviral, anticancer and immuno-
modulatory agent, its clinical efficacy, how-
ever, is limited by some drawbacks. IFN-α
is very sensitive to degradation and is also
rapidly cleared from blood circulation by
reticuloendothelial system (RES). In order
to enhance the drug’s therapeutic potential
by prolonging its circulation time and also to
reduce its side effects, a number of modifica-
tions to the molecule have been introduced
or attempted. One such modification is the
addition of polyethylene glycol (‘pegylation’)
to the molecule to reduce reticuloendothe-
lial cell-mediated clearance. This technique
has, indeed, proven very effective in pro-
longing the drug’s half life and reducing its
­unpleasant side effects.
A more recent innovative approach to
achieve the desired goals of controlled drug
release, long half life, targeted delivery and
optimum toxicity profile is the technique of
‘nanoencapsulation’ using various nanopar-
ticles. Nanoparticles such as liposomes and
micelles have been widely used for nanoen-
capsulation. A number of liposome encap-
sulated anticancer and antimicrobial agents
In vitro IFN-α release from IFN-α- and
pegylated IFN-α-loaded poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) and pegylated poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) nanoparticles
Tivadar Feczkó*,1,2,3, Andrea
Fodor-Kardos2,3, Muttuswamy
Sivakumaran4 & Quazi
Tanminul Haque Shubhra5
1Department of Medicine 1, Goethe
University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai
7, 60590, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
2Institute of Materials & Environmental
Chemistry, Research Centre for Natural
Sciences, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Magyar Tudósok Körútja 2,
1117, Budapest, Hungary
3Research Institute of Chemical & Process
Engineering, University of Pannonia,
Egyetem u. 10, H-8200 Veszprém,
Hungary
4Department of Haematology,
Peterborough City Hospital, Edith Cavell
Campus, Bretton Gate Peterborough,
PE3 9GZ, Peterborough, UK
5Nanomaterials Research Institute,
National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science & Technology,
Central 4, 1–1–1 Higashi, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305–8562, Japan
*Author for correspondence:
Tel.: +36 88 623508
Fax: +36 88 624038
tivadar.feczko@gmail.com
SPECIAL FOCUS y Nanotechnology for the diagnosis & treatment of diseases
For reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.com

2030
Nanomedicine (Lond.) (2016) 11(16)
future science group
Preliminary Communication    Feczkó, Fodor-Kardos, Sivakumaran & Shubhra
have entered routine clinical arena. Another class
of promising nanoparticles for encapsulation is the
US  FDA approved biocompatible and biodegradable
polymers such as poly( d , l -lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA),
poly( d , l -lactic-acid),
poly( d , l -lactic-co-
glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol (PEG-PLGA)  [3,4].
Micro/nanoencapsulation of IFN-α has been studied
by several research groups. Sanchez et al. [5] formulated
PLGA micro- and nanoparticles containing IFN-α
co-encapsulated with poloxamer and human serum
albumin by a double emulsion technique and PLGA/
poloxamer blend microspheres containing IFN-α by
oil-in-oil solvent extraction technique. Giri et al. [6] syn-
thesized IFN-α loaded cationic PLGA nanoparticles
with delipidated hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
adsorbed on the surface of nanoparticles. Besides
PLGA, a number of other micro/nanocarriers such as
poly-ε-caprolactone microspheres [7], lipid-based nano-
structures [8] and lipid-coated aquasomes [9] have also
been investigated as human IFN-α delivery systems.
However, it is well-known that serum proteins are
easily adsorbed onto hydrophobic polymeric nanopar-
ticles such as PLGA [10], and the so-called opsonization
results in the fast clearance of these nanoparticles by
the macrophages of RES from the blood circulation.
Biodegradable hydrophilic molecules, such as PEG,
can effectively inhibit such protein adsorption and
reduce clearance by RES.
The aim of this work was to encapsulate IFN-α
and pegylated IFN-α (PEG-IFN-α) by PLGA and
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol (PEG-
PLGA) copolymers using double emulsion solvent
evaporation method and to compare the in vitro release
of IFN-α from the resulting four distinct nanoparticles,
namely IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acids) (IFN-
PLGA), PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acids)
(PEG-IFN-PLGA), IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)-polyethylene glycol (IFN-PEG-PLGA) and PEG-
IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene
glycol (PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA). To our knowledge, the
two types of PEG-IFN-α containing nanoparticles are
of novel composition. Furthermore, we are of the opin-
ion that the in vitro investigations performed in both
phosphate buffered saline and human blood plasma
in this study should become the standard method to
evaluate IFN-α release in vitro, since this approach has
revealed important new aspects in IFN-α release study.
It is also emphasized that there is a long development
and improving work behind the results of the present
study. Some of our previous and recent papers  [10–15]
contain the most important achievements during the
optimization of size and encapsulation efficiency of
PLGA nanoparticles containing model proteins, while
the properties of magnetic PLGA nanoparticles with
the IFN-α active agent were initially improved in a
PhD thesis [16]. In the present study we used all of the
knowledge obtained during the almost 10-year devel-
opment of PLGA nanoparticles to produce optimal
IFN-α containing nanoparticles.
Materials & methods
Material
PLGA (50:50, Mw = 8000, Resomer® RG 502H) with
free carboxyl end groups was supplied by Boehringer
Ingelheim, Germany. PLGA-PEG (RESOMER Select
5050 DLG PEG 6000 [10 wt% PEG]) was obtained
from Evonik, US. Dichloromethane (DCM) was pur-
chased from Scharlab, Hungary. Polyvinyl alcohol (Mw
= 30,000–70,000), and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS;
pH 7.4) were products of Sigma-Aldrich, Germany.
Poloxamer (Pluronic® F68, Mw = 8350) was from BASF,
Germany. Roferon A® (human IFN-α-2a) and Pegasys
180 (pegylated human IFN-α-2a) were obtained from
Roche, Switzerland. The ELISA kits were purchased
from IBL International Gmbh, Germany. The human
blood plasma was supplied by the Hungarian National
Blood Transfusion Service, Hungary.
Preparation of IFN-α-loaded nanospheres
Nanoparticles were prepared by double emulsion sol-
vent evaporation method [10]. Briefly, 50 mg PLGA or
PEG-PLGA was dissolved in 5 ml DCM. A quantity of
0.5 ml protein solution consisted of Roferon A (theo-
retical IFN-α-2a concentration: 66 μg/ml) diluted
20-times by PBS, or Pegasys 180 (theoretical IFN-α-2a
concentration: 360 μg/ml) diluted 100-times by PBS
was added to the organic phase, and the two phases
were emulsified for 30 s by a probe sonicator (Model
W-220, Heat Systems-Ultrasonics) at a power of 70 W
and frequency of 20 kHz. This emulsion was added to
10 ml 2 wt% aqueous polyvinyl alcohol solution and
sonicated as described before but for 60 s to obtain
w/o/w double emulsion. The DCM was evaporated
under continuous stirring (800 r.p.m.) for 3 h using a
magnetic stirrer (IKA RET B). After the evaporation
of DCM, dispersed solid nanoparticles were obtained
and stored at -20°C for further experimental analysis.
Determination of particle size & encapsulation
efficiency
The size of the nanoparticles was analyzed by dynamic
light scattering method using Zetasizer Nano ZS
(Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK) at 25°C. The
encapsulation efficiency was determined indirectly. In
other words, 2 ml suspension (nanoparticle concentra-
tion: 4.76 mg/ml) of IFN-α-loaded nanoparticles was
centrifuged (Beckman Optima Max-E) for 25 min
at 30,000 × g, and the supernatant was removed for

www.futuremedicine.com
2031
Figure 1.  Volume distribution of the nanoparticles. IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acids), PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-
co-glycolic acids), IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol and PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)-polyethylene glycol were 129, 118, 119 and 104 nm, respectively. IFN-PEG-PLGA: IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol; IFN-PLGA: IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acids); PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA: PEG-IFN-α
in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol; PEG-IFN-PLGA: PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acids). 
10
8
6
4
2
0
14
12
1
10
100
1000
Size (nm)
Volume (%)
IFN-PLGA
PEG-IFN-PLGA
PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA
IFN-PEG-PLGA
future science group
In vitro IFN-α release from IFN-α- & PEG-IFN-α-loaded PLGA & PEG-PLGA nanoparticles    Preliminary Communication
determining the nonencapsulated IFN-α concentra-
tion by ELISA. The encapsulation efficiency (Ee) was
­calculated from Equation 1.
where mmax marked the initial IFN-α mass, which was
aimed to be microencapsulated, while mnenc denoted the
nonencapsulated IFN-α mass that was determined by
ELISA in the supernatant after the ­microencapsulation
process.
In vitro IFN-α release assay
For in vitro release investigations the pellet was resus-
pended in 2 ml human blood plasma or 2 ml PBS each
containing 0.03 wt% sodium azide bactericide, then
the suspension was pipetted into sterile 5 ml microtube.
The suspension containing microtubes were incubated
at 37°C, and shook at 250 r.p.m. in a G24 Environmen-
tal Incubator Shaker (New Brunswick Scientific, USA).
At predetermined intervals, 0.1 ml of each samples was
ultracentrifuged (Beckman Optima Max-E) for 25 min
at 30,000 × g, and the supernatant was removed for anal-
ysis of IFN-α. The amounts of nonencapsulated and
released IFN-α were determined using the ELISA kits.
Results & discussion
Size & encapsulation efficiency of
nanoparticles
The mean diameter of the four nanoparticles ranged
between 104 and 129 nm with polydispersity index of
0.11–0.16 (Figure 1). The mean diameters of IFN-α
in IFN-PLGA, PEG-IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acids) (PEG-IFN-PLGA), IFN-α in poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol (IFN-PEG-PLGA)
and PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA were 129, 118, 119 and 104
nm, respectively.
Encapsulation efficiencies, which were indirectly
investigated from the supernatants obtained by ultra-
centrifugation, were as high as 90.6, 87.9, 87.3 and
78.2% for IFN-PLGA, PEG-IFN-PLGA, IFN-PEG-
PLGA and PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA, respectively.
In vitro studies
Though in vivo release studies provide more reliable
profile of the sustained delivery systems, in vitro tests
can also give useful information about their stability
in aqueous medium. Another advantage of in vitro
release studies is that they are relatively inexpensive to
perform. In recent studies carried out with micro- or
nanoparticles designed for parenteral sustained delivery
of IFN-α  [5,7,9], the in vitro release experiments were
performed exclusively in PBS. Because blood proteins,
especially albumin, have an important protective role
toward the IFN molecule, we investigated the in vitro
release profiles both in human blood plasma and PBS.
In preliminary examinations we found that polox-
amer coating adsorbed onto PLGA nanoparticles (for
method description see [10]) containing IFN-α or PEG-
IFN-α caused dramatic decrease (50–80%) in IFN-α
release. It is not clear whether this observation is the
result of poloxamer mediated degradation of the IFN
molecule or is due to poloxamer mediated ­inhibition of
IFN release from polymer nanoparticles.
Figure 2A shows the recovery values of IFN-α and
PEG-IFN-α during a prolonged incubation of these
formulations in normal human plasma (control experi-
ment) and Figure 2B & C chart the changes in IFN-α
concentrations in normal human plasma and PBS,
respectively, during prolonged in vitro incubation of
the four different nanoparticles containing IFN-α or
PEG-IFN-α. Surprisingly, both IFN-α preparations
(unpegylated and pegylated) demonstrated high stabil-
ity in plasma, preserving about 70% of its baseline level
Ee
m
m
m
100
max
max
nenc
=
-

2032
Nanomedicine (Lond.) (2016) 11(16)
Figure 2. (A) Stability of IFN-α and pegylated IFN-α in human blood plasma. (B) In vitro release of IFN-α from
nanoparticles during prolonged incubation in plasma and (C) in PBS.
IFN-PEG-PLGA: IFN-α in pegylated PLGA; IFN-PLGA: IFN-α in PLGA; PBS: Phosphate-buffered saline; PEG-IFN:
Pegylated IFN-α; PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA: Pegylated IFN-α in pegylated PLGA; PEG-IFN-PLGA: Pegylated IFN-α in PLGA.
100
40
60
80
20
0
120
0
150
200
250
300
350
400
50
100
t (h)
IFN (%)
100
120
40
60
80
20
0
140
0
150
200
250
300
350
400
50
100
t (h)
IFN (%)
100
120
40
60
80
20
0
140
0
200
300
400
100
t (h)
IFN (%)
IFN-PLGA
PEG-IFN-PLGA
PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA
IFN-PEG-PLGA
IFN-PLGA
PEG-IFN-PLGA
PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA
IFN-PEG-PLGA
PEG-IFN
IFN
after 16 days. The baseline concentration values (1-h
postincubation) in the incubation medium (plasma)
were remarkably similar for IFN-PLGA, PEG-IFN-
PLGA and IFN-PEG-PLGA (range: 20.6–25.2 ng/l)
(Figure 2B). However, the baseline concentration of
IFN-α in incubation medium containing PEG-IFN-
future science group
Preliminary Communication    Feczkó, Fodor-Kardos, Sivakumaran & Shubhra

www.futuremedicine.com
2033
future science group
In vitro IFN-α release from IFN-α- & PEG-IFN-α-loaded PLGA & PEG-PLGA nanoparticles    Preliminary Communication
PEG-PLGA was less than half (9.0 ng/l) than that of
the other three nanoparticles. All four nanoparticles
showed remarkable sustained release properties. The
IFN-α release from both IFN-α and PEG-IFN-α
containing PLGA nanoparticles was 90% of the base-
line level at the end of the 16-day release study. IFN-α
encapsulated in PEG-PLGA showed consistently lower
concentrations (60–70% of baseline) compared with
IFN-PLGA and PEG-IFN-PLGA nanoparticles. In
contrast, remarkably, PEG-IFN-α encapsulated in
pegylated PLGA (PEG-IFN-PEG-PLGA) produced
sustained release of the encapsulated drug at levels up
to 117% of the baseline concentration.
As expected, incubation medium exerted signifi-
cant impact on the IFN-α release from various nano­
particles. The IFN-α release from the four nano­
particles incubated in plasma was significantly different
to that in PBS. But there were few similarities as well
(Figure 2B & C). With the exception of PEG-IFN-α
encapsulated in pegylated PLGA (PEG-IFN-PEG-
PLGA) which yielded consistently high IFN-α concen-
trations in excess of 80% of the baseline value in PBS,
other three nanoparticles released variable and inconsis-
tent levels of IFN-α which were significantly lower than
the levels recorded in plasma. It is very striking that the
baseline IFN-α concentrations in PBS with the three
nanoparticles (IFN-PLGA, PEG-IFN-PLGA and PEG-
IFN-PEG-PLGA) were almost one order of magnitude
lower (2.5, 3.3 and 2.7 ng/l, respectively) compared with
that seen in plasma. The worst performer was IFN-α
encapsulated in PEG-PLGA (IFN-PEG-PLGA) which
yielded exceptionally low levels of the drug in PBS, as
was in plasma. The baseline level was 0.7 ng/l and the
drug was not measurable after 4 days (Figure 2C).
Conclusion
Based on the results of our in vitro experiments, we
conclude that the nanoparticle of PEG-IFN-α encap-
sulated in pegylated PLGA polymer displays remark-
able drug release characteristics that would make this
formulation particularly suited for sustained IFN-α
delivery. Hence, this formulation merits further evalu-
ation as a potential drug carrier. PLGA nanoparticles
containing IFN-α or PEG-IFN-α also show promise.
The ability of these nanoparticles to release IFN-α
in a sustained manner has been confirmed. However,
their true pharmacokinetic properties including their
‘retainability’ in blood stream or in the targeted organ
can only be verified by in vivo studies. It is evident that
plasma constituents stabilize IFN-α thus rendering the
drug more stable in blood. However, the in vivo phar-
macokinetic properties of the above nanoparticles can-
not be deduced from the results of this study because
the experimental conditions did not contain either the
active enzymes that degrade IFNs in blood and tissues
or, more importantly, the cells of RES such as macro-
phages that remove bioincompatible particulates from
the blood. Hence, in vivo animal studies are warranted
to establish the precise pharmacokinetics of these
nanoparticles. It must also be added that the surface of
the nanoparticles may need to be modified to decrease
their hydrophobicity. An attempt to achieve this goal
by adsorbing poloxamer on to the polymer nanopar-
ticles has proved ineffective. Finally, any future studies
to evaluate the true potential of the above nanoparticles
must ideally include specific cell targeting using various
recognition ligands such as cell specific antibodies.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
T Feczkó acknowledges the funding of Alexander von Hum-
boldt Foundation (ref. no.: 3.3-UNG/1161203 STP). QTH
Shubhra is grateful for the support of KAKENHI (grant no:
15F15030) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sci-
ence (JSPS). The authors have no other relevant affiliations or
financial involvement with any organization or entity with a
financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject mat-
ter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those
disclosed.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this
manuscript.
Executive summary
• Interferon alpha (IFN-α) and pegylated IFN-α were encapsulated by poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) and pegylated
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) copolymers by double emulsion solvent evaporation method.
• The aim was to sustain the active agent release by means of the microencapsulation.
• The size of the four nanoparticles was found to be between 104 and 129 nm.
• Nanoparticles of this size may be suitable tools for potential intravenous drug delivery.
• The incubation medium influenced significantly the IFN-α release.
• The baseline released IFN-α amounts in phosphate buffered saline were generally approximately one order of
magnitude lower compared with that seen in plasma.
• Three of the four types of nanoparticles showed promising release feature during 16 days in blood plasma by
assuring almost constant IFN-α level.
• Pegylated IFN-α encapsulated by pegylated poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) displayed the most beneficial drug
release characteristics.

2034
Nanomedicine (Lond.) (2016) 11(16)
future science group
Preliminary Communication    Feczkó, Fodor-Kardos, Sivakumaran & Shubhra
References
Papers of special note have been highlighted as: • of interest;
•• of considerable interest
1
Pestka S, Krause CD, Walter MR. Interferons, interferon-
like cytokines, and their receptors. Immunol. Rev. 202, 8–32
(2004).
2
Brayfield A. Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference
(online). Pharmaceutical Press, London (2014).
www.medicinescomplete.com 
3
Roynik M, Kocbek P, Moret F. In vitro and in vivo
characterization of temoporfin-loaded PEGylated
PLGA nanoparticles for use in photodynamic therapy.
Nanomedicine 7, 663–677 (2012).
4
Jiang JX, Chen HW, Yu C et al. The promotion of
salinomycin delivery to hepatocellular carcinoma cells
through EGFR and CD133 aptamers conjugation by PLGA
nanoparticles. Nanomedicine 10, 1863–1879 (2015).
5
Sanchez A, Tobio M, Gonzalez L et al. Biodegradable
micro- and nanoparticles as long-term delivery vehicles for
interferon-alpha. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 18, 221–229
(2003).
•
To our knowledge IFN-α was entrapped with poly(lactic-
co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles by a double
emulsion technique for the first time.
6
Giri N, Tomar P, Karwasara VJ et al. Targeted novel
surface-modified nanoparticles for interferon delivery for
the treatment of hepatitis B. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. 43,
877–883 (2011).
7
Melo CS, Pereira BG, Silva-Cunha A. Poly-epsilon-
caprolactone microspheres containing interferon alpha as
alternative formulations for the treatment of chronic hepatitis
C. Braz. J. Pharm. Sci. 48, 51–59 (2012).
8
King M, Kumar P, Michel D et al. In vivo sustained dermal
delivery and pharmacokinetics of interferon alpha in
biphasic vesicles after topical application. Eur. J. Pharm.
Biopharm. 84, 532–539 (2013).
9
Kaur K, Kush P, Pandey RS et al. Stealth lipid coated
aquasomes bearing recombinant human interferon-α-2b
offered prolonged release and enhanced cytotoxicity in
ovarian cancer cells. Biomed. Pharmacother. 69, 267–276
(2015).
10
Shubhra QTH, Toth J, Gyenis J et al. Surface modification
of HSA containing magnetic PLGA nanoparticles by
poloxamer to decrease plasma protein adsorption. Colloids
Surf. B. 122, 529–536 (2014).
•
Surface modification of PLGA-human serum albumin
nanoparticles were achieved using poloxamer.
11
Feczkó T, Tóth J, Gyenis J. Comparison of the preparation
of PLGA-BSA nano- and microparticles by PVA, poloxamer
and PVP. Colloids Surf. A. 319, 188–195 (2008).
•
Ideal surfactant was selected for the preparation of protein
entrapping PLGA nanoparticles.
12
Feczkó T, Tóth J, Dósa G et al. Influence of process
conditions on the mean size of PLGA nanoparticles. Chem.
Eng. Proc. 50, 846–853 (2011).
•
Size of PLGA nanoparticles with a model protein was
optimized.
13
Feczkó T, Tóth J, Dósa G et al. Optimisation of protein
encapsulation in PLGA nanoparticles. Chem. Eng. Proc. 50,
757–765 (2011).
•
Encapsulation efficiency of PLGA nanoparticles with a
model protein was optimized.
14
Shubhra QTH, Kardos AF, Feczkó T et al. Co-encapsulation
of human serum albumin and superparamagnetic iron oxide
in PLGA nanoparticles: Part I. Effect of process variables on
the mean size. J. Microencaps. 31, 147–155 (2014).
15
Shubhra QTH, Feczkó T, Kardos AF et al. Co-encapsulation
of human serum albumin and superparamagnetic iron
oxide in PLGA nanoparticles: Part II. Effect of process
variables on protein model drug encapsulation efficiency.
J. Microencaps. 31, 156–165 (2014).
16
Shubhra QTH. Preparation and surface modification of
magnetic PLGA nanoparticles for sustaining natural interferon
release[PhD thesis]. University of Pannonia, Hungary (2014).
http://konyvtar.uni-pannon.hu/doktori/bovebb.php?id=553
••
IFN-α co-encapsulation with superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles was achieved by PLGA nanoparticles.