Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and
Engineering Aspects
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/colsurfa
Enhancing encapsulation efﬁciency of highly water-soluble antibiotic in
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles: Modiﬁcations of standard
nanoparticle preparation methods
Wean Sin Cheow, Kunn Hadinoto ∗
School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637459, Singapore
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 30 June 2010
Received in revised form 11 August 2010
Accepted 30 August 2010
Available online 9 September 2010
Keywords:
Nanoparticle
Encapsulation
Nanoprecipitation
Emulsiﬁcation
Polymer
Bioﬁlm
a b s t r a c t
Effective encapsulations of drugs that are highly soluble in both water and organic solvents are notori-
ously difﬁcult to achieve using standard nanoparticle preparation methods, such as nanoprecipitation
(NPC), single (ESE), and double (DESE) emulsiﬁcation-solvent-evaporation methods. Modiﬁcations of the
standard preparation methods are therefore needed to enhance encapsulation efﬁciency of this group of
drugs. The present work investigates the feasibility of enhancing the encapsulation efﬁciency of highly
water and solvent-soluble levoﬂoxacin, which is widely used in antibiotic therapy against pulmonary
bioﬁlm infections, into poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (i.e. PLGA) nanoparticles. In addition, the nanoparti-
cles are evaluated in terms of their drug loading, size, production yield, and in-vitro drug release proﬁle.
Lecithin inclusion into the aqueous phase in the ESE method results in two-fold improvements in the
encapsulation efﬁciency and drug loading (i.e. 23% and 2.3%, w/w, respectively) compared to the standard
method. Similar results are obtained when the water-miscibility level of the oil phase is increased in the
DESE method. Importantly, these nanoparticles possess size ≈200–300 nm and biphasic extended drug
release proﬁles suitable for anti-bioﬁlm therapy. Lastly, the nanoparticles can be readily transformed into
inhalable solid dosage forms without jeopardizing their drug loadings and antibacterial activities.
© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The use of nano-scale formulations in the delivery of therapeutic
agents through the pulmonary route has recently gained signiﬁ-
cant interest [1]. While nanoparticles can also be delivered through
the oral and parenteral routes, inhalation of nanoparticles repre-
sents a more attractive delivery route, because of the avoidance
of the ﬁrst-pass metabolism, ease of administration, and fast drug
absorptions due to the lungs’ high surface area and thin epithelial
layer. Speciﬁcally, polymer-based nanoparticle formulations have
been actively researched as inhaled therapeutic carriers owed to
the prospects of having (i) targeted drug deliveries by surface func-
tionalization of the polymer and (ii) sustained drug deliveries by
drug encapsulation in the polymer.
In this regard, antibiotic-loaded polymeric nanoparticles are
highly applicable for the treatment of persistent pulmonary infec-
tions, such as cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary
diseases (COPD), a disease suffered by more than 50 million peo-
ple worldwide [2]. Bacterial bioﬁlm colonies present in the lungs of
CF and COPD patients are surrounded by thick stationary sputum
notorious for binding and deactivating antibiotics, thereby negat-
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +65 6514 8381; fax: +65 6794 7553.
E-mail address: kunnong@ntu.edu.sg (K. Hadinoto).
ing the therapeutic effects of inhaled antibiotics. Encapsulation of
antibiotics into polymeric nanoparticles overcomes the problem
of antibiotic deactivations as it prevents interactions between the
antibiotics and the sputum contents.
Even though the encapsulation can also be achieved using
micro-scale
polymeric
carriers,
nano-scale
formulations
are
favored
because
the
average
spacing
of
sputum
mesh
is
≈60–300 nm [3], such that only nanoparticles can pass through the
sputum to reach embedded bioﬁlm colonies. By using nanoparticles
as the carriers, the antibiotics can be released in a sustained manner
in the vicinity of bioﬁlm colonies resulting in enhanced antibacte-
rial efﬁcacies compared to that obtained from antibiotic solutions
[4,5]. In addition, by virtue of their small size, nanoparticles can
effectively evade the pulmonary phagocytic clearance resulting in
an increased antibiotic bioavailability in the lungs [6].
To this end, the nanoparticles are ideally delivered to the lungs
using the dry powder inhaler (DPI) platform. The adoption of the
DPI platform translates to portability, improved shelf-life, and high
delivery efﬁciency of the inhaled antibiotics, in contrast to the rel-
ative inconvenience (e.g. lengthy treatment time, non-portability)
and low delivery efﬁciency associated with the conventional neb-
ulization delivery platform [1]. However, nanoparticles in the
dry-powder form exhibit a strong tendency to severely aggregate
due to their high surface energy, thus resulting in non-aerosolizable
powders. Furthermore, nanoparticles, with the exception of par-
0927-7757/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.colsurfa.2010.08.050

80
W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
ticles with aerodynamic diameter (dA) < 50 nm, are predominantly
exhaled from the lung without depositing [6]. To effectively deliver
the nanoparticles to the lungs, they are typically transformed into
micro-scale dry-powder aggregates in the inhalable size range
(1 ≤dA ≤5 m) by spray-drying technique [7,8].
To be therapeutically effective, good aerosolization proper-
ties of the nanoparticle aggregates must be complemented by
having a potent antibiotic encapsulated into the nanoparticles. Lev-
oﬂoxacin, a ﬂuoroquinolone antibiotic, is highly efﬁcacious against
pulmonary bioﬁlm cells as it does not have the propensity for spu-
tum binding, unlike aminoglycoside antibiotics [9,10]. However,
the high solubilities of levoﬂoxacin in both organic solvents (e.g.
dichloromethane, ethanol, acetone) and water (≈200–300 mg/mL
at pH ≈2–8) render its encapsulation in polymeric nanoparticles
highly inefﬁcient [11].
The low encapsulation efﬁciency of levoﬂoxacin is particularly
true when the nanoparticles are prepared by standard methods,
such as nanoprecipitation and emulsiﬁcation-solvent-evaporation.
For these methods, high drug solubility in either the organic phase
or the aqueous phase, but not both, is required to achieve high drug
encapsulation efﬁciency, as the drug must not leak out from its
initial dissolved phase upon precipitations of the polymer chains
to form the nanoparticles.
In this regard, several investigators have employed standard
nanoparticle preparation methods to encapsulate drugs that are
highly soluble in both water and organic solvents (∝102 mg/mL),
such as procaine hydrochloride, sodium cromoglycate, and pheno-
barbital, into polymeric nanoparticles [12–14]. Not unexpectedly,
low drug encapsulation efﬁciency (<20%, w/w) and low drug load-
ings (≈1%, w/w) were reported. For this reason, modiﬁcations to
the standard method were subsequently performed, including (i)
incorporation of salt additives, (ii) pH variation, and (iii) using
alternative solvents, which led to signiﬁcant improvements in the
encapsulation efﬁciency (≈40–50%, w/w) and consequently the
drug loading.
The main objective of the present work is to investigate the
effects of modiﬁcations of the standard nanoparticle preparation
methods on the encapsulation efﬁciency and drug loading of lev-
oﬂoxacin in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles (i.e. PLGA).
Three different nanoparticle preparation methods (i.e. nanoprecipi-
tation, single, and double emulsiﬁcation-solvent-evaporations) are
examined. PLGA is selected as the polymeric carrier because of its
well-established biodegradability and biocompatibility manifested
by its widespread applications as therapeutic carrier materials.
In addition to the encapsulation efﬁciency and drug loading, the
nanoparticles are evaluated in terms of their size, production yield,
and in-vitro drug release proﬁle. In this regard, small nanoparticle
sizes (<300 nm) are desirable to facilitate an effective sputum pene-
tration, whereas sustained antibiotic release proﬁles are favored as
they can potentially reduce the dosing frequency and lower the risk
of systemic toxicity. Moreover, the feasibility of transforming the
levoﬂoxacin-loaded PLGA nanoparticle suspension into inhalable
dry-powder nanoparticle aggregates by spray drying is investi-
gated. Lastly, the antibacterial efﬁcacy of the solid dosage form
formulation is examined against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aerug-
inosa) bioﬁlm cells, which constitute a majority of the bacterial
pathogens present in the lungs of CF and COPD patients [15].
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
PLGA polymer (Purasorb 5004A) is provided by PURAC Bioma-
terials (Netherlands). Chemicals used in the nanoparticle synthesis,
i.e. non-hydrochloride form of levoﬂoxacin (LEV), dichloromethane
(DCM), acetone, ethyl acetate, Pluronic F-68, poly(vinyl alcohol)
(PVA, MW = 13–23,000), polyethylene glycol (PEG, MW = 4000),
tyloxapol, and chitosan, are purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (USA).
Drying adjuvants (i.e. lecithin and l-leucine) and bioﬁlm growth
medium (i.e. Mueller Hinton Broth or MHB) are also purchased from
Sigma–Aldrich (USA). Phosphate buffer saline solution (PBS, pH
7.4) and dialysis membrane with a molecular weight cut-off size of
12,400 g/mol used in the in-vitro drug release study are purchased
from 1st Base (Singapore) and Sigma–Aldrich (USA), respectively.
P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain is obtained from American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC, USA).
2.2. Methods
2.2.1. Nanoparticle preparations by standard methods
2.2.1.1. LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles by nanoprecipitation (NPC).
PLGA and LEV are dissolved in water-miscible acetone. Upon addi-
tion of the PLGA/LEV solution into water, the acetone rapidly
diffuses into the aqueous phase resulting in the formation of LEV-
loaded PLGA nanoparticles. Speciﬁcally, 8 mg of LEV and 100 mg of
PLGA are dissolved in 5 mL of acetone after which the solution is
poured into 10 mL aqueous solution of 0.1% (w/v) Pluronic F-68.
The resulting nanoparticle suspension is stirred overnight at room
temperature to evaporate off the acetone present in the aqueous
phase, which is followed by twice centrifugations at 14,000 RPM
and two washing cycles to remove the non-encapsulated LEV and
the remaining acetone.
2.2.1.2. LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles by single emulsiﬁcation-
solvent-evaporation
(ESE). PLGA
and
LEV
are
dissolved
in
a
water-immiscible
solvent
(i.e.
DCM).
Upon
addition
of
the
PLGA/LEV solution into water under ultrasonication, an oil-in-
water nano-emulsion is formed. The DCM is slowly evaporated
to transform the nano-emulsion into a nanoparticle suspension.
Speciﬁcally, 8 mg of LEV and 80 mg of PLGA are dissolved in 2 mL
of DCM after which the solution is poured into 6 mL aqueous solu-
tion of 1.0% (w/v) PVA. The resulting solution is emulsiﬁed for 60 s
using a Vibra-Cell probe sonicator (VC 5040, Sonics and Materi-
als, USA). The nano-emulsion is next poured into 10 mL aqueous
solution of 0.1% (w/v) PVA and the DCM is evaporated overnight at
room temperature. The resulting nanoparticle suspension is cen-
trifuged twice at 11,000 RPM and two washing cycles to remove
the non-encapsulated LEV and DCM trace.
2.2.1.3. LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles by double-emulsiﬁcation-
solvent-evaporation (DESE). PLGA and LEV are dissolved separately
in a water-immiscible solvent (i.e. DCM) and deionized water,
respectively. The two solutions are emulsiﬁed under ultrasonica-
tion to form w/o nano-emulsion, which is subsequently added to a
second aqueous phase to form w/o/w nano-emulsion. Speciﬁcally,
9 mg of LEV is dissolved in 300 L of deionized water and 90 mg
of PLGA is dissolved in 3 mL of DCM. The aqueous LEV solution
is emulsiﬁed in the PLGA organic solution by sonication for 60 s.
The resulting nano-emulsion is poured into 12 mL aqueous solu-
tion of 2.0% (w/v) PVA and is sonicated for 60 s. The nano-emulsion
is stirred overnight at room temperature to evaporate off the DCM.
The resulting nanoparticle suspension is centrifuged and washed
following similar procedures described in the ESE method.
2.2.2. Nanoparticle physical characterizations
The drug encapsulation efﬁciency (i.e. % encapsulation) is deter-
mined from the mass ratio of the encapsulated drug to the drug
initially added. The encapsulated drug amount is determined by
subtracting the drug amount present in the supernatant after the
ﬁrst centrifugation from the drug amount initially added. The drug

W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
81
concentration in the supernatant is measured using UV–vis spec-
trophotometer (UV Mini-1240, Shimadzu, Japan) at absorbance
wavelength of 254 nm. The drug loading is determined from the
mass ratio of the encapsulated drug to the total nanoparticles
produced. The nanoparticle production yield is determined from
the mass ratio of the nanoparticle produced to the PLGA initially
added. The nanoparticle size and zeta potential are measured by
photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) using a Brookhaven 90Plus
Nanoparticle Size Analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation,
USA).
2.2.3. In-vitro drug release study
The drug release rate from the nanoparticles is determined using
the dialysis-bag method under a sink condition. The dissolution test
is conducted at 37 ◦C in a water bath under a continuous stirring.
The dialysis bag containing 2 mL nanoparticle suspension is placed
in an opaque bottle to prevent photodegradation of LEV. 6 mL PBS
is used as the release medium. At ﬁxed intervals, 4 mL of the release
medium is withdrawn and the amount of LEV released is mea-
sured by the UV–vis spectrophotometer. The withdrawn sample
is replaced with 4 mL of fresh PBS to maintain the sink condition.
2.2.4. Spray-drying experiment
The LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticle suspension is transformed
into dry-powder nanoparticle aggregates using a Büchi B-290
mini spray dryer (Büchi, Switzerland). Drying adjuvants are use
(i) to protect the structural integrity of the nanoparticles upon
drying and (ii) to ensure the nanoparticle aggregates can be recon-
stituted into primary nanoparticles upon their exposure to an
aqueous environment. The particle geometric size (dG) and shape
are characterized using a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
model JSM-6700F (JEOL, USA), whereas the particle effective den-
sity (e) is determined using a tap densitometer (Quantachromme,
USA). The aerodynamic diameter (dA) is determined from Eq. (1) in
which s = 1 g/cm3.
dA = dG

e
S
(1)
2.2.5. Antibacterial activity testing
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm cells are cultivated according to the method
of Harrison et al. [16]. Brieﬂy, a bacterial cell suspension used as the
inoculum is adjusted to 1.0 McFarland standard and is diluted by
30-fold in MHB to produce 1.0 × 107 colony forming units (CFU)/mL.
Next, 150 L of the inoculum is transferred to each well of a 96-
well microplate and a 96-peg lid is ﬁtted on top of the microplate
to provide a surface for the bioﬁlm growth. After 24-h-incubation
in a shaking incubator at 150 RPM and 37 ◦C, the peg lid is lifted
and the bioﬁlm formed on the pegs is rinsed with PBS to remove
loosely attached planktonic cells.
Table 1
Physical characteristics of nanoparticles prepared by the standard methods.
Run
Method
Size (nm)
% Encapsulation
Drug loading (%)
A
NPC
80 ± 30
15
0.7
B
ESE
190 ± 50
16
1.1
C
DESE
190 ± 80
10
1.0
To determine the antibacterial activity, bioﬁlm cells formed on
the pegs are exposed to a 20 L suspension of the dry-powder
nanoparticle aggregates and 180 L of MHB at dosing equal to
7 g/mL of LEV. Bioﬁlm cells exposed to 20 L of PBS and 180 L of
MHB are used as the experimental control. After 6, 12, and 24 h of
incubation at 37 ◦C, bioﬁlm cells remaining on the pegs are rinsed
with PBS and transferred to a new microplate containing 200 L of
PBS after a ﬁve-minute sonication. The recovered bioﬁlm cells are
serially diluted 10-fold and are plated onto agar plates to be incu-
bated overnight at 37 ◦C to determine the viable CFU. The results
reported are based on two replicates. The antibacterial activity of
the nanoparticle suspension is also tested to examine, if any, the
effect of the dry-powder transformation.
3. Results and discussions
3.1. LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles prepared by standard
methods
3.1.1. Physical characteristics
A summary of the LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles produced
by using the three standard methods (i.e. NPC, ESE, and DESE in
Runs A–C, respectively) is presented in Table 1. Despite the similar
initial amount of PLGA used (80–100 mg), nanoparticles prepared
by the NPC method exhibit a considerably smaller size (≈100 nm)
compared to that of nanoparticles prepared by the ESE and DESE
methods (≈200 nm). The sizes of the three nanoparticles produced
nevertheless remain within the range ideal for sputum penetra-
tions [3].
Particle size distribution of the nanoparticles produced by the
ESE method is presented in Fig. 1A, where a highly uniform distri-
bution is observed. Similarly, uniform size distributions are also
observed for the nanoparticles produced by the NPC and DESE
methods. SEM image of the nanoparticles in Fig. 1B indicates spher-
ical nanoparticles are produced and veriﬁes their highly uniform
size distribution. Zeta potentials of the three nanoparticles are in
the range of (−) 10–30 mV indicating colloidally stable nanoparti-
cles.
In addition to the smaller size, the NPC method results in a lower
production yield (≈65%) than the ESE and DESE methods (≈90%),
which can be attributed to greater particle losses during the cen-
trifugation and washing steps as a result of the smaller particle size.
Fig. 1. (A) Particle size distribution of LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles indicating a highly monodisperse distribution and (B) their SEM image for veriﬁcation.

82
W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
Due to the high aqueous solubility of LEV, % encapsulations of LEV
in nanoparticles prepared by the standard methods are expectably
low (≤16%, w/w) as LEV diffuses out into the aqueous phase during
the nanoparticle preparation steps. Even for the DESE method, the
% encapsulation is also low, despite the double emulsiﬁcation, due
to the high LEV solubility in the oil phase, which leads to the escape
of LEV from the inner to the outer aqueous phase.
Consequently, drug loadings of the nanoparticles are also low
(≤1.1%, w/w), where the NPC method results in the lowest drug
loading at 0.70% (w/w). Experimental uncertainties in the % encap-
sulation and drug loading measurements are between 4–8% and
5%, respectively, based on three replicates. The extremely low drug
loading of the nanoparticles produced by the NPC method is caused
byLEVdiffusesoutintotheaqueousphase,together withthe water-
miscible acetone, upon PLGA precipitations, which results in LEV
being predominantly adsorbed onto the nanoparticle surface. Con-
sequently, LEV is washed off more easily during the centrifugation
step, compared to when LEV is encapsulated within the polymer
matrix, resulting in a low drug loading. The dominant presence
of LEV on the surface of the nanoparticles produced by the NPC
method is manifested in its fast release proﬁle as presented in the
next section.
The use of water-immiscible DCM in the ESE and DESE meth-
ods prevents LEV from being predominantly adsorbed onto the
nanoparticle surface as reﬂected in the higher drug loading. In
this regard, the NPC and ESE methods are commonly employed to
encapsulate hydrophobic drugs into nanoparticles, where the lack
of drug solubility in the aqueous phase ensures high encapsulation
efﬁciency. Thus, when highly water-soluble drugs, such as LEV, are
encapsulated using the NPC and ESE methods, % encapsulations
achieved are expectably low.
The DESE method, on the other hand, is typically employed
to encapsulate water-soluble, but not solvent-soluble, drugs, as
the inner aqueous phase acts as a reservoir in which the drug is
dissolved, whereas the oil phase serves as a dissolution barrier pre-
venting the drug leakage from the inner to the outer aqueous phase.
For LEV, which is highly soluble in both the aqueous and oil/organic
phases, standard NPC, ESE, and DESE methods have been shown
to be incapable of producing high % encapsulations. Hence, mod-
iﬁcations to the standard methods are needed to enhance the %
encapsulation of LEV.
3.1.2. In-vitro drug release
In-vitro release proﬁles of LEV from the nanoparticles produced
in Runs A–C are shown in Fig. 2. Experimental uncertainties in the %
drug released, based on three replicates, are approximately 5%. As
previously mentioned, nanoparticles prepared by the NPC method
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
3
6
9
12
% drug released
Time (hours)
Run A
Run B
Run C
Fig. 2. In-vitro drug release proﬁles from nanoparticles prepared by the standard
methods.
exhibit a monophasic burst release proﬁle as a result of LEV being
predominantly present on the nanoparticle surface. Speciﬁcally,
≈80% of the loaded LEV is released within the ﬁrst hour and the
entire loaded drug is completely released within 3 h.
In contrast, nanoparticles prepared by the ESE and DESE meth-
ods display biphasic release proﬁles, where a high burst release
in the ﬁrst hour (≈40–50%) is observed due to the presence of
LEV on the nanoparticle surface. The burst release is followed by
a slower release of the remaining LEV contributed by LEV that is
encapsulated within the PLGA matrix. Not all of the loaded LEV,
however, only 80–90%, is released after 24 h. Nevertheless, the
extended biphasic LEV release proﬁles produced by the ESE and
DESE methods are more desirable than the burst release proﬁle as
they can ensure that LEV concentrations are maintained above the
level needed to inhibit the bioﬁlm growth in-between dosings [17],
as well as reducing the risk of systemic toxicity.
Thus, nanoparticles prepared by the ESE and DESE methods are
deemed superior compared to those prepared by the NPC method,
because of (i) the higher production yield and drug loading and (ii)
the sustained release proﬁles. For this reason, subsequent modiﬁ-
cation attempts to improve the % encapsulation and drug loading
are focused on the ESE and DESE methods. A summary of modiﬁca-
tions that are attempted and their corresponding results (i.e. size,
% encapsulation, and drug loading) is presented in Tables 2–4. The
modiﬁcations reported in the present work are not aimed towards
Table 2
Physical characteristics of nanoparticles prepared by the modiﬁed ESE methods.
Run
Modiﬁed phase
ESE modiﬁcation
Size (nm)
% Encapsulation
Drug loading (%)
B1
Organic
50% (v/v) DCM:ethyl acetate
≈200
≈15
≈1.0
B2
50% (v/v) DCM:acetone
B3
Aqueous
50% (w/w) PVA:lecithin
240 ± 50
23
2.3
Table 3
Physical characteristics of nanoparticles prepared by the modiﬁed single-phase DESE methods.
Run
Modiﬁed phase
DESE modiﬁcation
Size (nm)
% Encapsulation
Drug loading (%)
C1
Inner aqueous
PBS core
190 ± 70
6
0.6
C2
0.1% PEG (w/v)
200 ± 70
8
0.8
C3
0.1% PVA (w/v)
360 ± 120
22
2.1
C4
Oil
50% (v/v) DCM:acetone
110 ± 40
22
2.4
C5
50% (v/v) DCM:ethyl acetate
140 ± 50
20
2.1

W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
83
Table 4
Physical characteristics of nanoparticles prepared by the modiﬁed multiple-phase DESE methods.
Run
Inner aqueous phase
Oil phase
Outer aqueous phase
Size (nm)
% Encapsulation
Drug loading (%)
C6
0.1% (w/v) PVA
DCM:acetone
Standard
170 ± 80
6
0.5
C7
DCM:ethyl acetate
180 ± 80
10
1.0
C8
Standard
50% (w/w) PEG
290 ± 110
11
1.0
C9
50% (w/w) chitosan
720 ± 290
8
0.8
C10
50% (w/w) tyloxapol
720 ± 340
4
0.4
the more usual parameters, such as stirring speed, pH change, start-
ing polymer and drug concentrations, or the volume ratio of the
aqueous to organic phase, because these parameters have been
found in our preliminary study to be non-inﬂuential towards the
LEV encapsulation process.
3.2. LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles prepared by the modiﬁed ESE
methods
Three modiﬁcations to the standard ESE method are performed,
which are (1, 2) using alternative solvents composed of 50% (v/v)
mixture of DCM and either acetone or ethyl acetate in Runs B1
and B2, and (3) addition of 50% (w/w) lecithin into the aqueous
PVA solution in Run B3. For the effect of using alternative solvents,
precipitations of PLGA chains to form solid nanoparticles are slower
when completely water-immiscible solvents, such as DCM, are used
as it takes longer for the polymer molecules to be exposed to the
aqueous phase upon emulsiﬁcations. The slower PLGA precipitation
rate provides an opening for the highly water-soluble LEV to leak
out of the organic phase into the aqueous phase resulting in the low
% encapsulation.
For this reason, varying the water-miscibility level of the solvent
is thought to potentially have an impact on the % encapsulation.
The solvent composition is therefore varied from 100% (v/v) DCM
in the standard ESE method to 50% (v/v) of DCM and ethyl acetate
in Run B1, and to 50% (v/v) of DCM and acetone in Run B2. The
water-miscibility levels of these mixtures increase in the following
order: 100% (v/v) DCM < 50% (v/v) DCM/ethyl acetate < 50% (v/v)
DCM/acetone, which is attributed to the partial-miscibility of ethyl
acetate and full-miscibility of acetone in water.
Completely replacing DCM with a highly water-miscible sol-
vent, such as acetone, however, is not pursued as it denotes a shift
from the ESE method to the NPC method, which has been found to
produce less-than-ideal nanoparticles. The results of Runs B1 and
B2 in Table 2 nonetheless suggest that the effects of the water-
miscibility level of the solvent on the % encapsulation and drug
loading are minimal, where their respective values remain in the
15% (w/w) and 1.0% (w/w) ranges. Hence, instead of attempting
to reduce the time-scale of the drug leak-out, the next modiﬁca-
tion attempt aims to incorporate physicochemical barriers into the
nanoparticles, so that the drug leak-out can be minimized.
In this regard, adding phospholipid lecithin into the aqueous
phase during PLGA nanoparticle preparation has been shown to
result in adsorptions of the amphiphilic lecithin onto the nanopar-
ticle surface through hydrophobic interactions [18]. As LEV is
lipophilic [19], it interacts with the hydrophobic tails of the lecithin
similar to the PLGA–lecithin interactions, such that incorporating
lecithin onto the nanoparticle surface can potentially enhance the
% encapsulation by entrapping LEV in the phospholipid layer.
Indeed, two-fold increases in the % encapsulation and drug load-
ing to 23% and 2.3% (w/w), respectively, are observed in Run B3,
where lecithin is added to the 1.0% (w/v) aqueous PVA solution at
50% (w/w) PVA to lecithin ratio. Moreover, in spite of the higher
drug loading, the lecithin inclusion slows down the LEV release
rate due to the hydrophobic interactions as shown in Fig. 3. As a
result, the PLGA–lecithin nanoparticles exhibit the ideal extended
biphasic release proﬁle.
3.3. LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles prepared by the modiﬁed
DESE methods
For the DESE method, the modiﬁcations are ﬁrst performed
one-at-a-time on either the inner aqueous phase or the oil phase
of the w/o/w nano-emulsion to identify formulation parameters
(e.g. solvent, surfactant) that have the most signiﬁcant impacts
on the % encapsulation. Subsequently, simultaneous modiﬁcations
involving the signiﬁcant parameters are carried out in both the
inner/outer aqueous and oil phases.
3.3.1. Single-phase modiﬁcations
First, the effects of modifying the inner aqueous phase on the
% encapsulation and drug loading are investigated by substituting
deionized water used in the standard DESE method with 100% (v/v)
PBS in Run C1, and 0.1% (w/v) aqueous PEG and PVA solutions in
Runs C2 and C3, respectively. The oil and outer aqueous phases
remain unchanged from the standard DESE method.
First, owed to the higher observed solubility of LEV in PBS
than that in deionized water, the use of PBS as the inner aque-
ous phase is thought to be able to increase the % encapsulation,
where LEV would remain longer in the aqueous core upon emul-
siﬁcations due to the lower degree of supersaturation. However,
the results of Run C1 presented in Table 3 suggest otherwise,
where the % encapsulation and drug loading are lowered to 6% and
0.6% (w/w), respectively, from 10% and 1.0% (w/w) in the standard
DESE method. The nanoparticle size is nevertheless unaffected and
remains in the ≈200–300 nm range.
Second, the inclusion of a surfactant in the inner aqueous phase
of the DESE method has been shown at the micro-scale to enhance
the primary w/o emulsion stability, which increases the aqueous
pore volume of the carrier particles, resulting in higher % encap-
sulation and drug loading [20]. For this reason, the inclusion of
surfactants in the aqueous core is now attempted at the nano-scale
0
20
40
60
80
0
6
12
18
24
% drug released
Time (hours)
Run B w/o lecithin
Run B3 w/ lecithin
Fig. 3. Effect of lecithin inclusion on the in-vitro drug release proﬁle.

84
W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
to examine whether a similar ﬁnding is observed. Using PEG as
the surfactant, the results of Run C2 indicate that % encapsulation
and drug loading are lowered to 8% and 0.8% (w/w), respectively,
without any signiﬁcant impacts on the nanoparticle size.
In contrast, using PVA as the surfactant in Run C3 yields nanopar-
ticles having higher % encapsulation and drug loading (i.e. 22% and
2.1%, w/w, respectively), which is similar to the results obtained
with the lecithin inclusion in the ESE method (i.e. Run B3). How-
ever, the nanoparticle size in Run C3 is increased to ≈400–500 nm
range, which makes them less suitable for sputum penetration. The
signiﬁcant difference in the effects of PEG and PVA inclusion on the
% encapsulation is likely due to the fact that adsorbed PEG is washed
off the PLGA nanoparticle surface more easily than PVA [21]. Sig-
niﬁcantly, the results of Runs B3 and C3 indicate that the presence
of surfactant layer on the PLGA nanoparticle surface can enhance
the % encapsulation and drug loading provided that the surfactant
remains adsorbed upon washing.
Third, the modiﬁcations are performed in the oil phase by
replacing the 100% (v/v) DCM in the standard DESE method with
50% (v/v) mixture of DCM/acetone in Run C4 and DCM/ethyl acetate
in Run C5. DCM cannot be completely replaced as the DESE method
requires the presence of a completely water-immiscible solvent.
In this regard, the type of solvent used as the oil phase has been
reported to impact the % drug encapsulation in nanoparticles due
to the different nanoparticle precipitation rates depending on the
water-miscibility level of the solvent used [22].
Speciﬁcally, in the second emulsiﬁcation step, the polymer pre-
cipitates at a rate proportional to the water-miscibility level of the
solvent, where the more water-miscible the solvent is, the faster
the polymer precipitates to form w/o/w nano-emulsion as a result
of the faster exposure to the aqueous phase. The faster the poly-
mer precipitates and encapsulates the drug in the process, less drug
leaks out from the inner to the outer aqueous phase, which in theory
should improve the % encapsulation.
For this reason, the effect of varying the water-miscibility level
of the oil phase is investigated in Runs C4 and C5 by adding miscible
acetone and partially miscible ethyl acetate into the DCM. In con-
trast to the results of a similar study in the ESE method (i.e. Runs
B1–B2), the results in Table 3 indicate that increasing the water-
miscibility level of the oil phase does lead to improvements in the
% encapsulation and drug loading to 20–22% and 2.1–2.4% (w/w),
respectively, which is more than two-fold higher than the values
obtained from the standard DESE method.
The slightly higher drug loading achieved in Run C4 is attributed
to the higher water-miscibility of the DCM/acetone mixture com-
pared to the DCM/ethyl acetate mixture. Importantly, the higher
drug loading does not jeopardize the nanoparticle sizes, which in
fact are slightly reduced to be below 200 nm. Despite the increased
drug loading, the in-vitro LEV release proﬁles of Runs C4 and C5
presented in Fig. 4 are similar to that of the standard DESE method
in Run C, where 90% of the drug is released within 6 h.
The difference in the effects of varying the water-miscibility
level on the % encapsulation between the ESE and DESE methods
is postulated to be caused by the fact that in the DESE method, the
drug is dissolved in the inner aqueous phase, such that faster poly-
mer precipitations at higher water-miscibility levels can prevent
the drug leak-out from the inner aqueous core to the outer aque-
ous phase resulting in higher % encapsulation. In contrast, the drug
is dissolved in the oil phase (i.e. solvent phase) in the ESE method,
such that even though faster polymer precipitations increase the
% encapsulation, the diffusion of the water-miscible component of
the oil phase (i.e. either ethyl acetate or acetone) into the aqueous
phase upon emulsiﬁcation results in the dissolved drug being trans-
ported out to the aqueous phase together with the water-miscible
solvent. As a result, the increase in the % encapsulation owed to the
faster polymer precipitation is cancelled out by the drug loss due to
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
6
12
18
24
% drug released
Time (hours)
Run C
Run C4
Run C5
Fig. 4. Effect of varying the water-miscibility level of the oil phase on the in-vitro
drug release proﬁle.
the solvent outward diffusion resulting in insigniﬁcant net effects
on the % encapsulation.
3.3.2. Multiple-phase modiﬁcations
To examine whether further improvements in the % encapsula-
tion and drug loading can be achieved, simultaneous modiﬁcations
involving the inner and outer aqueous phases, as well as the oil
phase, are investigated in Runs C6–C10 presented in Table 4. 0.1%
(w/v) aqueous PVA solution is used as the inner aqueous phase in
Runs C6–C10 as it has been found in Run C3 to signiﬁcantly improve
the % encapsulation and drug loading, though it also results in a
larger nanoparticle size.
First, the effects of simultaneously modifying the inner aqueous
phase and the oil phase, while keeping the outer aqueous phase
unchanged (i.e. 2.0% (w/v) aqueous PVA solution), are examined
in Runs C6 and C7. DCM/acetone and DCM/ethyl acetate mixtures
are used as the oil phase in Runs C6 and C7, respectively, as they
have been found to increase the % encapsulation in Runs C4–C5. The
results, however, indicate that a synergistic effect is not observed
when the inner aqueous phase and the oil phase are modiﬁed simul-
taneously.
In fact, less favorable results in terms of the % encapsulation and
drug loading are observed in Runs C6–C7 compared to the single-
phase modiﬁcation results. Speciﬁcally, the % encapsulation is back
to be ≤10% (w/w) similar to that obtained using the standard DESE
method. Similarly, the drug loading falls below 1.0% (w/w) and the
nanoparticle size is back in the ≈200–300 nm range.
Second, the effects of simultaneously modifying the inner
and outer aqueous phases, while keeping the oil phase remains
unchanged (i.e. 100% (v/v) DCM), are investigated in Runs C8–C10.
The outer aqueous phase is modiﬁed by adding new surfactants or
polymers widely used in drug delivery formulation, such as PEG,
chitosan, and tyloxapol, into the 2.0% (w/v) aqueous PVA solution.
The presence of these materials at 50% (w/w) ratio in the outer
aqueous phase is thought to have the potential to inﬂuence the
drug leak-out rate.
The results nonetheless indicate that the % encapsulation, drug
loading, and nanoparticle size deteriorate signiﬁcantly compared
to the single-phase modiﬁcations in Runs C3–C5. Speciﬁcally, the
% encapsulations are low between 4% and 11% (w/w) resulting
in low drug loadings between 0.1% and 1.0% (w/w). Furthermore,
the nanoparticle sizes in Runs C9 and C10 are excessively large at
≈700 nm, hence signifying the importance of either PVA or PEG

W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
85
in maintaining the colloidal stability of the w/o/w nano-emulsion
formed.
To summarize, for the DESE method, simultaneous mod-
iﬁcations involving multiple phases negatively affect the %
encapsulation and drug loading. In contrast, single-phase modiﬁ-
cations in Runs C3–C5 result in two-fold improvements in the %
encapsulation and drug loading. However, the large nanoparticle
size produced in Run C3 (i.e. ≥400 nm) is undesirable due to the
lack of sputum penetration ability. For the ESE method, the lecithin
inclusion in Run B3 similarly results in a two-fold improvement
in the % encapsulation and drug loading, while maintaining the
nanoparticle size in the 200–300 nm range.
Importantly, the nanoparticles produced in Run B3 exhibit a
slower sustained LEV release proﬁle, which make them more
attractive than those produced in Runs C4 and C5, despite the sim-
ilarities in terms of their size, % encapsulation, drug loading, and
production yield. In addition, the ESE method is simpler than the
DESE method owed to the single-emulsiﬁcation step. For this rea-
son, the lecithin-modiﬁed nanoparticles produced in Run B3 are
selected as the optimal formulation for further spray-drying and
antibacterial activity testing experiments.
3.4. Spray-drying production of dry-powder LEV-loaded PLGA
nanoparticles
The following spray-drying conditions are employed, i.e.
inlet temperature = 100 ◦C, feed rate = 2.8 mL/min, atomizing ﬂow
rate = 350 L/h, and feed concentration = 1.0% (w/w). Due to the high
drying temperature, which is above the glass transition tempera-
ture of PLGA (i.e. ≈35 ◦C), the inclusion of leucine and PVA as drying
adjuvants is necessary to protect the structural integrity of the PLGA
nanoparticles. The ratio of the nanoparticles to the drying adju-
vants is maintained at 1:1. Dry-powder nanoparticle aggregates
produced at this spray drying condition possess dG between 6 and
9 m and low eff (≈0.3 g/cm3) owed to the hollow morphology as
shown in Fig. 5A. Due to the hollow morphology, dA of these par-
ticles is between 3 and 5 m rendering them suitable for inhaled
delivery.
Importantly, the drug loading of the dry-powder nanoparticles
is similar in magnitude to that of the suspension form indi-
cating a minimal drug loss in the drying process. Furthermore,
these nanoparticle aggregates readily reconstitute into individual
nanoparticles upon their exposure to an aqueous environment. The
nanoparticle size after the re-constitution in Fig. 5B, however, is
about twice larger than their size prior to the dry-powder transfor-
mation, which is due to the coalescence of the PLGA nanoparticles
upon exposure to a high temperature above their glass transition
temperature as can be seen in Fig. 5C.
3.5. Antibacterial activity of dry-powder LEV-loaded PLGA
nanoparticles
To ensure that the activity of the nanoparticles is not affected
by their transformation into the dry-powder form, antibacterial
activities of both the dry-powder and suspension forms of the
nanoparticles are tested against P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm cells. The
antibacterial activities of the nanoparticles are evaluated in a time-
kill study after 6, 12, and 24 h of antibiotic exposures using a LEV
dose of 7 ± 0.3 g/mL, which is above the minimum inhibitory con-
centration (MIC) of the planktonic cells (≈2 g/mL) as bioﬁlm cells
are well-known to exhibit a higher antibiotic tolerances than their
planktonic cell counterparts.
The experimental control (i.e. bioﬁlm cells exposed to PBS)
shown in Fig. 6A remains at a density of ≈8 log (CFU/peg) through-
out the duration of the study signifying a steady-state bioﬁlm
density when no antibiotic is introduced. After 6 h of exposure to
Fig. 5. (A) SEM image of dry-powder nanoparticle aggregates prepared by spray-
drying, (B) particle size distribution of the nanoparticles before the dry-powder
transformation and after re-constitution, and (C) SEM image of the re-dispersed
nanoparticles.
the nanoparticles, 99.999% of the bioﬁlm cells are killed with only
3 log (CFU/peg) of surviving bioﬁlm cells, which is attributed to
the high antibiotic concentration produced by the burst release.
The number of bioﬁlm cells, however, increases at the 12th and
24th hour to 5 log (CFU/peg) as the surviving bioﬁlm cells begin to
multiply due to the subsequent slower antibiotic release. Overall,
99.9% of the bioﬁlm cells are eradicated after 24 h. Importantly, at all
time-points, the extents of bioﬁlm cell eradications afforded by the
dry-powder form are nearly identical to that of the nanoparticle
suspension, which indicates that the dry-powder transformation
does not affect the antibacterial activity of the nanoparticles.
In addition, to verify that the bioﬁlm eradications presented in
Fig. 6A are solely attributed to the LEV-loaded nanoparticles, and
not because of the presence of hazardous solvent trace from the
nanoparticle preparation steps, antibacterial activity of the blank
nanoparticles (i.e. no antibiotic) is examined. The results in Fig. 6B
indicate that the blank nanoparticles, in their suspension and dry-

86
W.S. Cheow, K. Hadinoto / Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 370 (2010) 79–86
Fig. 6. (A) Antibacterial activities of the LEV-loaded nanoparticles at three differ-
ent time-points (DP3 = dry-powder nanoparticles, NP3 = nanoparticle suspension)
against P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm cells and (B) non-activity of blank nanoparticles.
powder forms, do not exhibit any antibacterial activities towards
the bioﬁlm cells as the log (CFU/peg) of the bioﬁlm cells exposed
to the blank nanoparticles are similar in magnitude to that of the
control experiment.
4. Conclusions
LEV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles are prepared by employing the
standard and modiﬁed NPC, ESE and DESE methods. In compari-
son to the standard methods, single-phase modiﬁcations involving
(i) the addition of lecithin into the aqueous phase (ESE) and (ii)
the use of alternative solvents (DESE) result in two-fold improve-
ments in the % encapsulation and drug loading (i.e. ≈22–24% and
2.1–2.4%, w/w, respectively). Signiﬁcantly, the experimental results
indicate that simultaneous modiﬁcations involving multiple phases
do not lead to additive effects of the single-phase modiﬁcations. In
other words, an observed doubling of the % encapsulation when
two single-phase modiﬁcations are performed separately does not
translate to quadrupled % encapsulation when the two modiﬁ-
cations are performed simultaneously. The optimal formulation,
which is evaluated in terms of the nanoparticle size, % encapsu-
lation, drug loading, in-vitro drug release proﬁle, and production
yield, has been identiﬁed in the form of PLGA-lecithin nanopar-
ticles prepared by the ESE method. Lastly, the nanoparticles can
be straightforwardly transformed into the inhalable solid dosage
form by spray-drying with the inclusion of drying adjuvants. The
dry-powder nanoparticles exhibit similar antibacterial activities as
their aqueous suspension form against P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm cells.
Acknowledgement
A ﬁnancial support from Nanyang Technological University’s
Start-Up Grant (Grant No. SUG 8/07) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
[1] P.G.A. Rogueda, D. Traini, The nanoscale in pulmonary delivery. Part 2: Formu-
lation platforms, Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 4 (2007) 607–620.
[2] P.R.A. Pauwels, K.F. Rabe, Burden and clinical features of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), Lancet 364 (2004) 613–620.
[3] J.S. Suk, S.K. Lai, Y.-Y. Wang, L.M. Ensign, P.L. Zeitlin, M.P. Boyle, J. Hanes, The
penetration of fresh undiluted sputum expectorated by cystic ﬁbrosis patients
by non-adhesive polymer nanoparticles, Biomaterials 30 (2009) 2591–2597.
[4] P. Meers, M. Neville, V. Malinin, A.W. Scotto, G. Sardaryan, R. Kurumunda,
C. Mackinson, G. James, S. Fisher, W.R. Perkins, Bioﬁlm penetration, trig-
gered release and in vivo activity of inhaled liposomal amikacin in chronic
Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections, J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 61 (2008)
859–868.
[5] M. Halwani, S. Hebert, Z.E. Suntres, R.M. Lafrenie, A.O. Azghani, A. Omri,
Bismuth-thiol incorporation enhances biological activities of liposomal
tobramycin against bacterial bioﬁlm and quorum sensing molecules produc-
tion by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Int. J. Pharm. 373 (2009) 141–146.
[6] P.G.A. Rogueda, D. Traini, The nanoscale in pulmonary delivery. Part 1:
deposition, fate, toxicology and effects, Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 4 (2007)
595–606.
[7] K. Hadinoto, W.S. Cheow, Hollow spherical nanoparticulate aggregates as
potential ultrasound contrast agent: shell thickness characterization, Drug Dev.
Ind. Pharm. 35 (2009) 1167–1179.
[8] K. Hadinoto, Mechanical stability of hollow spherical nano-aggregates as ultra-
sound contrast agent, Int. J. Pharm. 374 (2009) 153–161.
[9] H. Ishida, Y. Ishida, Y. Kurosaka, T. Otani, K. Sato, H. Kobayashi, In vitro and in
vivo activities of levoﬂoxacin against bioﬁlm-producing Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 42 (1998) 1641–1645.
[10] S. Schwank, Z. Rajacic, W. Zimmerli, J. Blaser, Impact of bacterial bioﬁlm for-
mation on in vitro and in vivo activities of antibiotics, Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 42 (1998) 895–898.
[11] A. Frick, H. Möller, E. Wirbitzki, Biopharmaceutical characterization of oral
immediate release drug products. In vitro/in vivo comparison of phe-
noxymethylpenicillin potassium, glimepiride and levoﬂoxacin, Eur. J. Pharm.
Biopharm. 46 (1998) 305–311.
[12] T. Govender, S. Stolnik, M.C. Garnett, L. Illum, S.S. Davis, PLGA nanoparticles
prepared by nanoprecipitation: drug loading and release studies of a water
soluble drug, J. Controlled Release 57 (1999) 171–185.
[13] J.M. Barichello, M. Morishita, K. Takayama, T. Nagai, Encapsulation of
hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs in PLGA nanoparticles by the nanoprecipi-
tation method, Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 25 (1999) 471–476.
[14] L. Peltonen, J. Aitta, S. Hyvönen, M. Karjalainen, J. Hirvonen, Improved entrap-
ment efﬁciency of hydrophilic drug substance during nanoprecipitation of
poly(l)lactide nanoparticles, AAPS PharmSciTech 5 (2004) [electronic resource].
[15] D. Worlitzsch, R. Tarran, M. Ulrich, U. Schwab, A. Cekici, K.C. Meyer, P. Bir-
rer, G. Bellon, J.r. Berger, T. Weiss, K. Botzenhart, J.R. Yankaskas, S. Randell,
R.C. Boucher, G. Döring, Effects of reduced mucus oxygen concentration in
airway Pseudomonas infections of cystic ﬁbrosis patients, Journal of Clinical
Investigation 109 (2002) 317–325.
[16] J. Harrison, H. Ceri, J. Yerly, C. Stremick, Y. Hu, R. Martinuzzi, R. Turner, The use
of microscopy and three-dimensional visualization to evaluate the structure of
microbial bioﬁlms cultivated in the calgary bioﬁlm device, Biol. Proced. Online
8 (2006) 194–215.
[17] W. Cheow, M. Chang, K. Hadinoto, Antibacterial efﬁcacy of inhalable
levoﬂoxacin-loaded polymeric nanoparticles against E. coli bioﬁlm cells: the
effect of antibiotic release proﬁle, Pharm. Res. 27 (2010) 1597–1609.
[18] L. Zhang, J.M. Chan, F.X. Gu, J.-W. Rhee, A.Z. Wang, A.F. Radovic-Moreno,
F. Alexis, R. Langer, O.C. Farokhzad, Self-assembled lipid-polymer hybrid
nanoparticles: a robust drug delivery platform, ACS Nano 2 (2008) 1696–1702.
[19] A. Lambert, J.-B. Regnouf-de-Vains, M.F. Ruiz-López, Structure of levoﬂoxacin
in hydrophilic and hydrophobic media: Relationship to its antibacterial prop-
erties, Chem. Phys. Lett. 442 (2007) 281–284.
[20] Y.-Y. Yang, T.-S. Chung, N. Ping Ng, Morphology, drug distribution, and in vitro
release proﬁles of biodegradable polymeric microspheres containing protein
fabricated by double-emulsion solvent extraction/evaporation method, Bio-
materials 22 (2001) 231–241.
[21] L. Mu, P.H. Seow, S.N. Ang, S.S. Feng, Study on surfactant coating of polymeric
nanoparticles for controlled delivery of anticancer drug, Colloid Polym. Sci. 283
(2004) 58–65.
[22] E. Cohen-Sela, M. Chorny, N. Koroukhov, H.D. Danenberg, G. Golomb, A new
double emulsion solvent diffusion technique for encapsulating hydrophilic
molecules in PLGA nanoparticles, J. Controlled Release 133 (2009) 90–95.