Research paper
Factorial design formulation optimization and in vitro characterization
of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles for colon delivery
Mohamed A. Akl a, b, Alma Kartal-Hodzic a, Timo Oksanen a, Hatem R. Ismael b,
Mohsen M. Afouna b, Marjo Yliperttula a, Ahmed M. Samy b, Tapani Viitala a, *
a Centre for Drug Research, Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, Finland
b Department of Pharmaceutics and Ind. Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy (Boys), Al-Azhar University, Nasr City, Cairo, Egypt
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 30 October 2015
Received in revised form
5 December 2015
Accepted 12 January 2016
Available online 14 January 2016
Keywords:
Curcumin
PLGA nanoparticles
Poly vinyl alcohol
Factorial design
Colon targeting
a b s t r a c t
We have employed a 23 factorial design approach for optimizing curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles
with a speciﬁc interest in colon treatment. Curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles were prepared by using
the single emulsion solvent evaporation technique. In vitro characterizations of the curcumin-loaded
nanoparticles revealed that the mean particle sizes of the nanoparticles ranged from 181.5 nm to
206.9 nm, the zeta potential values were in the range of 30.6 to 41.7 mV, the encapsulation efﬁ-
ciencies were between 58.1 and 83.2% and the drug release from the formulations was in the range of
34.4e62.8%. The properties of the optimized curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles predicted by the 23
factorial design approach correlated very well with the experimentally determined particle size of
219.6 nm, zeta potential of 36.8 mV, encapsulation efﬁciency of 74.4% and a 56.2% cumulative drug
release after 24 h. In vitro cellular uptake studies with HT-29 cells showed that the optimized curcumin-
loaded PLGA nanoparticle exhibited a much higher cellular uptake of curcumin (i.e. 7.01 ± 0.33 mg/
106 cells) than a native curcumin solution (3.74 ± 0.56 mg/106 cells). Stability studies also showed that all
investigated formulations were stable at least for 2 months.
© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Colon cancer is the third leading cause of cancer deaths in the
United States [1]. The American Cancer Society has estimated that
there will be about 93 090 new cases of colon cancer and 39 610
new cases of rectal cancer in the United States in 2015, and these
are expected to cause about 49 700 deaths during 2015. The life-
time risk of developing a colorectal cancer is about 1 in 20 [1]. The
most common treatment for cancer is chemotherapy. However,
chemotherapy is often associated with a number of drawbacks such
as
nonselective
distribution
of
drugs,
multidrug
resistance,
enhanced drug toxicity, undesirable side effects on normal tissue
and inherent lack of beneﬁcial response of cytotoxic anticancer
drugs [2,3]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop thera-
peutic modalities with no or minimal side effects on healthy tissues
or organs.
Natural herbal extracts, such as curcumin, hold high potential as
chemotherapeutic agents because they are often safe and do not
show side effects on healthy tissues or organs. They also show
chemo preventive activities against malignancy. In recent years
curcumin has drawn the attention of research because it sensitizes
cancer cells for chemotherapy by inducing programmed cell death
[4,5]. Curcumin is a polyphenol of turmeric derived from the roots
(rhizomes) of Curcuma longa. Several studies have shown that
curcumin has anti-inﬂammatory [6], antioxidant [7] and antimi-
crobial effects [8]. The most important effect is, however, its po-
tential use against cancer due to its ability to suppress the
proliferation of a wide variety of tumor cells [4,9]. Curcumin has
been reported to be a potent inhibitor of the nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kappa B) activation in various human cancer cell lines [10e12].
It has also been reported to decrease multidrug resistance by down
regulating the P-glycoprotein (PGP) expression in resistant cells.
Unfortunately, the high potential of curcumin for treatment of
cancer and chronic inﬂammation is hampered by its low aqueous
solubility at physiological pH conditions, rapid decomposition in
alkaline media and instability towards light. For example, curcumin
is practically insoluble in neutral aqueous solutions (i.e. ~ 1 mM), but
* Corresponding author. Centre for Drug Research, Division of Pharmaceutical
Biosciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 56, 00014 Helsinki,
Finland.
E-mail address: tapani.viitala@helsinki.ﬁ(T. Viitala).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jddst
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2016.01.007
1773-2247/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20

dissolves readily in organic solvents such as alcohols, ketones, es-
ters, and organic acids (i.e. in the range between 1 and 30 mM) [13].
The solubility of curcumin in dichloromethane has also been re-
ported to be at least 3 mM [14]. The hydrophobic character of
curcumin results in pharmacokinetic restrictions such as low ab-
sorption, poor bioavailability by oral route, extensive metabolism
and rapid elimination [15]. Numerous approaches have been made
to ameliorate the bioavailability of curcumin. These include the use
of adjuvants, which can block metabolic pathways of curcumin (for
example Piperine, a known inhibitor of hepatic and intestinal glu-
curonidation) [15]. The main strategies used to overcome the
physicochemical limitations of curcumin and to increase its
bioavailability are based on loading the compound in nanocarriers,
such as liposomes [16,17], polymeric micelles [18], phospholipid
complexes [19] and polymeric nanoparticles [15,20]. Nanocarriers
have been shown to increase the solubility, provide longer circu-
lation times, enhance permeability, and increase resistance towards
metabolic processes of curcumin. Some formulations have been
designed to prolong the release of curcumin, while others have
additional mechanisms to improve the cellular delivery or intra-
cellular release.
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles (PNPs) have widely
been developed as nanoscale drug delivery vehicles for cancer
treatment due to their excellent endocytosis efﬁciency, passive
tumor-targeting, high encapsulation efﬁciency, and ability to
deliver a wide range of therapeutic agents [21e23]. Nano-
encapsulation protects the molecules from premature degradation,
improves their solubility, and promotes controlled drug release and
drug targeting. Nanoparticles (NPs) can at best represent a low risk
of toxicity and they can often enhance the drug efﬁcacy, i.e. speci-
ﬁcity, tolerability and therapeutic index [24]. Poly (lactic-co-gly-
colic acid) (PLGA) is an approved biodegradable polymer with good
biocompatibility. Therefore, PLGA and its various derivatives have
widely been explored as carriers for controlled delivery of a large
number of both small molecular drugs and macromolecular ther-
apeutics [25,26]. The majority of PLGA-based drug delivery carriers
are in the form of injectables, but PLGA-based nanoparticles are
also continuously investigated for oral delivery [27e29].
The main objective of this study was to preliminary investigate
the use of PLGA for encapsulating curcumin into PNPs for oral colon
delivery purposes. A prerequisite for this is to conﬁrm that
curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles withstand the harsh condi-
tions in the stomach and small intestine before they reach the co-
lon. Therefore, we have focused on the systematic optimization of
the basic composition of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles with
the aim to improve the aqueous dispersability of curcumin, to
protect it from degradation in simulated gastrointestinal ﬂuids and
to increase curcumin uptake in colon cancer cells. Curcumin-loaded
PNPs (C-PNPs) were prepared with an emulsion solvent evapora-
tion technique by using a 23 factorial design approach to optimize
the composition of the C-PNP. The physicochemical properties and
in vitro characterization of C-PNPs were determined and performed
through particle size, zeta potential, drug encapsulation, drug
release kinetics, Fourier-Transform infrared spectroscopy and dif-
ferential scanning calorimetry studies. Furthermore, the stability of
the C-PNPs at room temperature and 4 C, the stability of the
optimized C-PNP against enzyme and bile salt, and the in vitro
cellular uptake of the optimized C-PNP formulation in colon cancer
cells were also investigated.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Curcumin was purchased from Cayman chemical company
(China). Acid terminated Poly (D,
L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA,
50:50, Mw ¼ 7.000e17.000, Resomer® RG 502H), Polyvinyl alcohol
(PVA,
mw
31,000e50,000
e
87e89%
hydrolyzed),
Dichloro-
methane (DCM) and Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) tablet were
purchased from SigmaeAldrich (Germany). Potassium dihydrogen
phosphate
was
purchased
from
Riedel-de-Haen
(Germany).
Acetonitrile, Phosphoric acid and Methanol were purchased from
Fluka (United Kingdom). OPTI-MEM I, McCoy's 5a Medium, and
TrypLE Express were obtained from Gibco, Life Technologies (USA).
2.2. Preparation and characterization of the formulations
2.2.1. Experimental design
Statgraphics® plus software version 4 was used to adapt the 23
factorial design approach to optimize the curcumin-loaded PLGA
nanoparticle (C-PNP). The independent variables for optimization
were 1) the amount of PLGA in the organic phase (X1 ¼ c PLGA), 2)
the PVA concentration in the aqueous phase (X2 ¼ c PVA) and 3) the
amount of curcumin in the organic phase (X3 ¼ c CUR). The selected
responses were 1) the mean particle size of the C-PNPs (Y1), 2) the
zeta potential of the C-PNPs (Y2), 3) the encapsulation efﬁciency
(Y3) and 4) the percentage (%) of the cumulative drug released after
24 h (Y4). Each independent variable was given a high and low level
value as shown in Table 1.
2.2.2. Preparation of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles (C-PNPs)
C-PNPs were prepared by using the single emulsion-solvent
evaporation technique reported by Khalil et al. [24] with slight
modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy, 100e200 mg of PLGA polymer was dissolved
in 5 ml of dichloromethane (DCM) in a glass tube. Then 10 or 20 mg
of curcumin powder was added to the polymer/solvent mixture and
allowed to dissolve for 30 min, with intermittent vortexing. The
organic phase containing PLGA and curcumin was rapidly added
drop wise into a glass tube containing 10 ml of PVA in an aqueous
solution, while vortexing. Once all the drug/polymer mixture was
added to the PVA solution, the contents were vortexed for an
additional 10 s at a high setting. The tube contents were then
emulsiﬁed by using sonication for 7 min at 40% amplitude in an ice
- water bath by using a probe sonicator (Vibra-Cell VCX 750 soni-
cator, Sonics & Materials Inc., Newtown, CT, USA). The resulting ﬁne
(O/W) emulsion was immediately poured into 30 ml of an aqueous
PVA 0.5% w/v solution under rapid stirring with a magnetic stirrer.
Dichloromethane was then evaporated from the droplets under
magnetic stirring at 800 rpm for 3 h. The nanoparticles were
collected by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 15 min and washed 3
times with Milli-Q water. Supernatants were collected to evaluate
the encapsulation efﬁciency of curcumin. Finally, the pellet of the
nanoparticles was re-suspended in 5 ml of Milli-Q water.
2.2.3. Physicochemical characterization and drug encapsulation
efﬁciency
2.2.3.1. Particle size determination. The average particle size and
PDI of the C-PNPs were measured with dynamic light scattering by
using a ZetaSizer Nano ZS instrument (Malvern Instruments Ltd,
Table 1
Independent and dependent variables used for the 23 factorial design approach.
Independent variables
Level
Dependent variables
Low
High
Amount of PLGA
100 mg
200 mg
Particle size
Concentration of PVA
2%
4%
Zeta potential
Amount of curcumin
10 mg
20 mg
Encapsulation efﬁciency
In vitro release over 24 h.
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
11

Worcestershire, UK). Samples for particle size measurements were
prepared by taking 300 ml of each nanoparticle suspension and
diluting these with 3 ml of Milli-Q water and sonicating for 30 s.
Particle size measurements were performed at RT with a detection
angle of 90о. Each sample was measured in triplicate.
2.2.3.2. Zeta potential measurements. Samples for zeta potential
measurements were prepared in the same way as those for particle
size measurements. Zeta potentials for three replicates of each
sample were measured at RT with a ZetaSizer Nano ZS instrument
(Malvern Instruments Ltd, Worcestershire, UK).
2.2.3.3. Determination of drug encapsulation efﬁciency. The encap-
sulation efﬁciency of curcumin in the C-PNPs was determined by a
direct technique reported by Tsai et al. [20] with minor modiﬁca-
tions. Brieﬂy, 1 ml of each C-PNP suspension was centrifuged at
15,000 rpm for 30 min. The supernatant was removed after
centrifugation and 1 ml of acetonitrile (a common solvent for PLGA
and the drug) was added to the C-PNP pellets. Then the samples in
acetonitrile were sonicated for 15 min to break the C-PNP structure
and to release the curcumin. The amounts of curcumin in the C-
PNPs were analyzed by UPLC at 426 nm after dilution with the
mobile phase composed of 38% acetonitrile and 62% of a 0.05%
phosphoric acid solution. The drug encapsulation efﬁciency (EE %)
for each C-PNP was then calculated by using the following
equation:
%EE ¼ ½ðCurcumin encapsulated=Curcumin totalÞ  100
(1)
2.2.4. In vitro drug release and release kinetics
2.2.4.1. In-vitro curcumin release. The in vitro release of curcumin
from the C-PNPs was determined by the dialysis bag method re-
ported earlier by Zanotto-Filho et al. [30] with slight modiﬁcations.
Brieﬂy, 1 ml of each C-PNP solution was transferred in dialysis bags
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) with a molecular cut-off 12e14 kDa. The
bags were suspended in 150 ml of release medium containing 2%
SDS. SDS was employed in the buffer solution not only to maintain
sink condition but also to provide solubility for curcumin in the
aqueous phase. The whole set-up was placed in a shaking water
bath (Grant OLS200, Cambridge Ltd, England) adjusted to a con-
stant speed of 100 rpm at 37 ± 0.5 C. Samples were withdrawn at
appropriate time intervals from the outer solution to estimate the
percentage of the drug released. In order to mimic the in vivo
release characteristics of the C-PNP formulations, a three-stage
approach
with
three-different
pH
release
media
was
used
following the recommendations on methods for dosage forms
testing by US Pharmacopeia 36 [31]. The time interval and medium
used for the three different stages were the following:
Stage 1. Time interval: 1e2 h. Simulated gastric ﬂuid (SGF); 0.2 g
sodium chloride, 0.32 g pepsin and 0.7 ml concentrated HCl in
100 ml water, pH 1.2.
Stage 2. Time interval: 3e5 h. Simulated intestinal ﬂuid (SIF);
0.68 mg KH2PO4 and 7.7 ml of 0.2 M NaOH in 100 ml water, pH
6.8.
Stage3. Time interval: 6e24 h. Simulated colonic ﬂuid SCF; PBS,
pH 7.4.
One ml of sample was taken from the outer solution at appro-
priate time intervals, i.e. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12 and 24 h. The sample
was then ﬁltered by using a 0.45 mm ﬁlter membrane. The curcumin
concentration was determined by diluting the ﬁltrate with the
mobile phase mixture composed of 38% of acetonitrile and 62% of a
0.05% phosphoric acid solution and measured with UPLC at lmax
426 nm. After the sample was taken, 1 ml of fresh medium was
always added back to the outer media.
2.2.4.2. Drug release kinetics. The in vitro drug release data were
ﬁtted to three different kinetic models which are often used to
describe the behavior of the drug release from nanospheres, i.e.
zero-order, ﬁrst-order and Higuchi diffusion models. The proper
mode of release was determined on the basis of the correlation
coefﬁcient (r) for the linear regression ﬁt of the parameters
involved, where the highest correlation coefﬁcient represents the
actual mode of the release.
2.2.5. Characterization of the optimized C-PNP formulation
2.2.5.1. Morphology
of
the
polymeric
nanoparticles.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used for morpho-
logical analysis of the optimized C-PNP formulation. The samples of
freshly made C-PNP suspensions in aqueous media were dropped
onto a copper grid with a carbon ﬁlm support and extra solution
was removed with a ﬁlter paper. Samples were observed directly
with TEM (JEOL 1200 EX II, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) after they were
dried below room temperature without further staining.
2.2.5.2. Fourier- Transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). The FT-IR
spectra (range 4000e650 cm1) were recorded on freeze dried
samples using a Vertex 70 (Bruker Optics GmbH, Germany) spec-
trophotometer (spectral resolution of 4 cm1 and 32 co-added
scans) equipped with a MIRacle™ATR device (Pike Optics, Ger-
many) with a single reﬂection diamond crystal (1.8 mm spot size).
The raw materials, the blank optimized PNP without curcumin and
the optimized C-PNP formulations were analyzed with attenuated
total reﬂectance (ATR). The samples were deposited on top of a
diamond crystal and secured with a high-pressure clamp. The
average of characteristic peaks of IR transmission spectra was
recorded from triplicate samples.
2.2.5.3. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC studies were
performed in order to characterize the physical state of curcumin in
the optimized C-PNP formulation. Thermograms of the raw mate-
rials, the blank optimized PNP without curcumin and the optimized
C-PNP formulations were obtained by using a DSC 823 instrument
(Mettler Toledo, Switzerland). About 4e5 mg of each sample was
weighed, crimped into an aluminum pan along with the standard
reference aluminum pan and analyzed at a scanning temperature
range from 50 to 300 C at a heating rate of 10 C/min. The baseline
was optimized before each run.
2.2.6. In vitro cellular drug uptake
2.2.6.1. Cell culture and cell preparation. Human Caucasian colon
adenocarcinoma (HT29) cells, obtained from the European Collec-
tion of Cell Cultures (ECACC), were cultured in a McCoy's 5a me-
dium
supplemented
with
10%
FBS
at
a
density
of
about
2  106 cells/mL in 75 cm2 culture ﬂasks. The cells were maintained
at 37 C, 95% relative humidity and 5% CO2. The cells were harvested
weekly from plastic ﬂasks (75 cm2) with TrypLE Express and the
medium was changed twice a week.
2.2.6.2. Cellular drug uptake assay. HT29 cells were cultured in a
12-well plate with a cell density of 1  104 cells/per well and
incubated in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37 C for 24 h before cellular
drug uptake studies. The cell association assay was carried out at
37 C in OPTI-MEM I reduced serum medium which contained
either enough pure curcumin or the optimized C-PNP formulation.
Each well contained the same absolute amount of 200 mg curcumin.
Washing the wells with ice-cold PBS three times terminated the
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
12

incubation of both the cells with pure curcumin and the optimized
C-PNP formulation. The washed cells were lysed in PBS containing
0.5% Triton X-100, after which they were vortexed for 3 min. Then
the cell lysate was centrifuged to remove the cellular debris. The
amount of curcumin in the cell lysate was determined by diluting
the cell lysate with the mobile phase mixture composed of 38% of
acetonitrile and 62% of a 0.05% phosphoric acid solution and
measured with UPLC at lmax ¼ 426 nm.
2.2.7. In vitro stability of C-PNP formulations
The evaluation of the in vitro stability of the C-PNP formulations
was performed with two different tests: 1) the effect of storage
temperature on particle size and 2) the effect of SGF, SIF and SCF on
particle size. The particle size of each C-PNP stored for up to two
months at 4 C and RT was regularly measured at RT with a Zeta-
Sizer Nano ZS instrument (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Worcester-
shire, UK). The pH dependency of the stability of the C-PNPs was
evaluated at three pHs (i.e. pH 1.2, 6.8, 7.4) in order to evaluate the
stability of the C-PNPs in the gastrointestinal tract. The C-PNPs
were incubated at 37
C and samples were collected at pre-
determined time points of 0, 0.5, 2, 6 and 24 h. Simulated gastric
ﬂuid (SGF) with and without pepsin and simulated intestinal ﬂuid
(SIF) with and without pancreatin were prepared according to the
US Pharmacopeia 36 [31]. SGF was composed of 0.2% sodium
chloride (NaCl), 0.2% pepsin, and 0.7% hydrochloric acid (HCl) in
water, and the pH was adjusted to 1.2. SIF was composed of 0.68%
monobasic potassium phosphate (KH2PO4) (pH adjusted to 6.8
using NaOH) and 3 mM sodium taurocholate to simulate the effect
of bile salts. For each C-PNP formulation, 5 ml of the suspension was
added to 15 ml of simulated ﬂuid followed by incubation for 2 h in
SGF and 6 h in SIF at 37 C.
3. Results
3.1. Curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles for optimizing the C-PNP
composition
The single-emulsion solvent-evaporation method was success-
fully utilized for preparing a range of C-PNP formulations. All
together eight different C-PNP formulations with different ratios of
curcumin, PLGA and PVA (C-PNP1 to C-PNP8, Table 2) were pre-
pared and characterized according to the 23 factorial design
approach. The amounts of curcumin (X1), PLGA (X2) and PVA (X3)
were chosen as independent parameters, whereas measurements
of particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), zeta potential (ZP),
encapsulation efﬁciency (EE%) and percentage of drug released
after 24 h (DR%) were used as input of the dependent parameters in
the 23 factorial design model in order to ﬁnd the most optimal C-
PNP composition.
3.2. Experimentally determined input parameters of C-PNPs for
optimization purposes
Table 2 shows the measured values of particle size, PDI and ZP,
EE% and DR% for the eight C-PNP formulations prepared during the
optimization stage. It is clear that the particle sizes of all the C-PNPs
were in the nano-size range. The smallest particle size of 181.5 nm
was observed for C1-PNP and the largest particle size of 206.9 nm
was observed for C4-PNP. The PDI values of the C-PNPs were also
very small (i.e. between 0.010 and 0.060), which shows that the
particle size populations of the C-PNPs were very homogeneous. A
small PDI value (i.e. ~ 0.2) is often taken as an indication of a ho-
mogenous particle size population, while a larger PDI value
(i.e. > 0.3) reﬂects a heterogeneous particle size population.
The ZP of all of the C-PNP formulations displayed a high negative
value between 30.5 mV and 41.7 mV. A ZP value for nano-
particles in this range usually predicts that the nanoparticles are
very well dispersed in the aqueous media and that the nano-
suspensions will have a very good stability and tolerance against
aggregation.
The EE%s of the C-PNPs were also very promising. A high EE% is
usually desirable for NPs because it increases the probability that
the NPs can deliver and release a sufﬁcient amount of drug to the
target site, especially if the NPs are designed so that they have a
proper triggered release mechanism and drug release rate. The
highest and the lowest EE% of 83.2% and 58.1% were observed for
C4-PNP and C5-PNP, respectively (Table 2). The EE%s of the C-PNPs
in this study clearly correlated with the particle size, i.e. the larger
the particle size of the C-PNP the higher the EE% and vice versa.
The in vitro drug release characteristics of the C-PNPs were
determined by using a three-different pH release media (SGF pH
1.2, SIF pH 6.8 and SCF pH 7.4) approach in order to mimic the GI
tract. The in vitro release proﬁles of curcumin were obtained by
graphing the cumulative percentage of the drug released with
respect to the total amount of curcumin encapsulated in the C-PNPs
as a function of the time (Fig. 1). Negligible amounts of curcumin
were released in the buffer medium at pH 1.2 which indicates that
curcumin is not released from any of the C-PNPs at gastric and ileal
pH (acidic pH). Only a slight release of curcumin took place at pH
6.8 (i.e. < 5%), whereas a substantial amount of curcumin was
released at the higher colonic pH values of pH ¼ 7.4. All the C-PNPs
also displayed a sustained release of curcumin up to 24 h at colonic
pH values (Fig. 1). The highest release of curcumin after 24 h, 62.8%,
was observed for the C-PNP4 formulation (Fig. 1A, Table 2), whereas
the lowest release of curcumin, 34.4%, was observed for the C-PNP1
formulation (Fig. 1A, Table 2).
The release kinetic parameters obtained by ﬁtting kinetic
models to the drug release data of the C-PNP formulations are
shown in Table S1 (supporting information). The release of curcu-
min from the C-PNPs followed mainly the Higuchi diffusion model,
Table 2
Composition of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles and experimentally measured input responses.
Run
Factor (code
value)
Response
X1
X2
X3
PDI
Particle size (nm) Y1
Zeta potential (mV) Y2
Encapsulation efﬁciency (%) Y3
Cumulative drug release (DR%) Y4
C-PNP1
100
4
10
0.060 ± 0.011
181.5 ± 2.2
41.7 ± 0.7
59.1 ± 1.9
34.4
C-PNP2
200
4
20
0.040 ± 0.041
204.6 ± 2.8
37.5 ± 1.4
77.9 ± 2.0
39.1
C-PNP3
100
4
20
0.020 ± 0.015
192.2 ± 0.5
33.5 ± 1.2
61.8 ± 1.7
40.3
C-PNP4
200
2
20
0.010 ± 0.014
206.9 ± 2.1
40.8 ± 0.3
83.2 ± 2.1
62.8
C-PNP5
100
2
10
0.030 ± 0.008
185.0 ± 2.1
30.6 ± 0.8
58.1 ± 1.3
36.8
C-PNP6
200
4
10
0.035 ± 0.017
191.1 ± 1.9
36.2 ± 1.2
66.3 ± 0.4
46.5
C-PNP7
100
2
20
0.034 ± 0.035
196.7 ± 1.4
37.5 ± 0.8
63.9 ± 3.5
36.7
C-PNP8
200
2
10
0.042 ± 0.034
200.9 ± 2.2
40.0 ± 0.9
75.5 ± 2.3
38.6
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
13

except for the C-PNP7 formulation which followed best the zero
order model. This indicates that the release of curcumin from the C-
PNP formulations was mainly taking place by diffusion from the
matrix and not due to the degradation of PLGA.
3.3. Optimization of C-PNP composition by using the 23 factorial
design model
The criteria for optimizing the C-PNP formulation were smaller
particle size, higher zeta potential, higher EE % and higher DR%. The
experimentally measured input parameters were analyzed by using
the Statgraphics® plus software. The ANOVA analysis for the
dependent parameters where the statistical signiﬁcance of each
effect was tested by comparing the mean square against an esti-
mate of the experimental error is shown in Table S2 (supporting
information). The analysis provided mathematical relationships
between the independent variables and the dependent responses
in the form of polynomial equations (Table S3, supporting infor-
mation). These polynomial equations represent the quantitative
effect of the process variables (X1, X2 and X3) and their interaction
on the designated responses and can be graphically visualized
through Pareto charts, main effects and surface plots (Figs. S1eS3,
supporting information). Table S2 and Figs. S1eS3 show that the
independent variables selected for our study, i.e. the amount of
PLGA (X1), concentration of PVA (X2) and amount of curcumin (X3),
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the dependent parameters of particle size
(Y1), zeta potential (Y2), EE % (Y3) and drug release % (Y4).
The ﬁnal optimal composition of the C-PNP9 formulation ob-
tained from the analysis by using the 23 factorial design model
contained 176.8 mg of PLGA, 2% of PVA and 16.6 mg of curcumin
(Table 3). This optimized formulation was further characterized by
particle size, PDI, ZP, EE%, DR%, FT-IR spectroscopy, DSC and ﬁnally
evaluated with in vitro cell uptake studies.
3.4. Physico-chemical properties of optimized PNPs
The experimentally measured particle size, PDI, ZP and EE% of
the
optimized
C-PNP9
formulation
were
219.6
±
1.6
nm,
0.186 ± 0.023, -36.8 and 74.4 ± 8.2%, respectively (Table 3). The
average diameter and PDI demonstrate that the optimized C-PNP9
formulation is composed of nanoparticles with a narrow size dis-
tribution. The size, PDI and ZP of a blank PNP with the same
composition as the optimized C-PNP but without curcumin were
found to be 198.3 ± 4.1 nm, 0.270 ± 0.021 and 41.5 ± 0.1 mV,
respectively.
In order to assess the protection of the content under acidic
conditions and to verify an effective delivery at neutral pH the
in vitro release proﬁle of curcumin from the optimized C-PNP9
formulation was investigated in buffers with different pH values. As
was previously seen for the C-PNP1 e C-PNP8 formulations, negli-
gible amounts of curcumin were released in the buffer medium at
pH 1.2 meaning that curcumin was not released from the optimized
Fig. 1. In-vitro release of curcumin from A) C-PNP1 e C-PNP4 and B) C-PNP5 e C-PNP8 formulations.
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
14

C-PNP at gastric and ileal pH (acidic pH). This indicates that the
optimized C-PNP9 formulation was able to protect curcumin under
highly acidic conditions. Similarly, only a slight release of curcumin
took place at pH 6.8 (<5%), whereas a substantial amount of cur-
cumin was released from the optimized C-PNP9 at higher colonic
pH values of pH ¼ 7.4 (i.e. 56.2% over 24 h and 72.7% over 48 h). The
in vitro release data of curcumin for the optimized C-PNP9 formu-
lation were best ﬁtted by a Higuchi diffusion model with r2 ¼ 0.974
(Table S1, supporting information).
3.5. FT-IR analysis
FT-IR spectroscopy was used to identify the chemical composi-
tion of the materials used for the optimized C-PNP9 formulation,
and for revealing any signiﬁcant interactions between the materials
in the formulation mixtures. Fig. 2A shows the characteristic FT-IR
spectra of acid terminated PLGA powder, curcumin powder, the
blank optimized nanoparticle without curcumin (B-PNP9) and the
optimized curcumin-loaded nanoparticle (C-PNP9).
The PLGA spectrum shows a strong peak at 1750 cm1 which is
attributed to carbonyl stretching (C]O) in the PLGA backbone [32].
The strongest peak, seen at 1087 cm1, is a characteristic peak for
PLGA and originates from the CeOeC stretching. The shoulder at
1050 cm1 is attributed to CeCH3 vibrations from the polymer
backbone, while the peak at 1454 cm1 is due to the CeH stretching
in the methyl groups. The bands at 1385 cm1 and 877 cm1 are
assigned to OeH in-plane and out-of-plane bending vibrations,
respectively. The band at 757 cm1 is assigned to out-of-plane
bending vibration of CeH. Other peaks such as 1184 cm1 were
assigned to bonded hydroxyl end groups of the PLGA chains, and
1268 cm1 and 1385 cm1 to the PLGA ester groups. The blank
optimized nanoparticle without curcumin (B-PNP9) showed the
same characteristic peaks in the FT-IR spectrum as the pure PLGA
powder which indicates that PLGA remains intact during the pro-
cessing steps to form nanoparticles.
The FT-IR spectrum of curcumin (Fig. 2A) shows a characteristic
absorption band at 3490 cm1, which can be attributed to the
phenolic OeH stretching vibration [33]. The bands at 1506 and
1429 cm1 are due to the stretching vibrations of CeC of the ben-
zene ring and oleﬁnic bending vibration of the C]C group bound to
the benzene ring, respectively [34]. These peaks were shifted to
1515 and 1453 cm1 in the optimized C-PNP9 formulation which
conﬁrmed that curcumin was encapsulated by the PLGA polymer.
The peak at 1629 cm1 is attributed to the carbonyl (eC]O)
stretching of the conjugated ketone. This was shifted to 1753 cm1
in the optimized C-PNP9 formulation. Other peaks in the curcumin
spectrum were the sharp absorption peaks at 1602 cm1 corre-
sponding to the benzene ring stretching [35], the peak at 810 cm1
originating from the stretching vibration of CeO in eCeOCH3 and
the peak for the CeOeC stretching of ether that appeared at
1029 cm1 [36]. The peak for the phenyl ring was observed at
867 cm1 in the optimized C-PNP9 formulation. All major bands of
both curcumin and PLGA shift to higher frequencies in the
optimized C-PNP9 formulation indicating that curcumin and PLGA
were bound together to form a more stable nanoparticle. The
optimized C-PNP9 formulation showed characteristic peaks which
were close to the principal IR peaks of the drug, conﬁrming the
presence of curcumin in the nanospheres.
3.6. DSC analysis
DSC measurements were employed to study the crystal trans-
formation of the optimized C-PNP9 formulation. The DSC curves of
native curcumin powder, acid terminated PLGA powder, B-PNP9
and optimized C-PNP9 are shown in Fig. 2B. Native curcumin
powder displayed a sharp peak at 181.9 C corresponding to the
melting point of crystalline regions. The PLGA polymer showed a
small peak at around 52 C. This peak is referred to the relaxation
peak that follows the glass transition and is consistent with earlier
studies [37,38]. No notable melting point was observed for PLGA
due to its amorphous nature. The DSC curves of pure PLGA show
that the polymer is thermally stable up to 220 C. Moreover, it can
also be seen from Fig. 2B that the PLGA polymer had the same
melting peak as the optimized C-PNP9 formulation. This indicates
that the encapsulation process did not affect the polymer structure.
However, no crystalline drug material in the optimized C-PNP9
formulation was detected as the sharp peak of curcumin was
absent.
3.7. Morphology of optimized PNPs
The morphological appearance of the optimized C-PNP9 and
blank optimized B-PNP9 without curcumin were visualized with a
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) (Fig. 3A and B, respec-
tively). The TEM images show that both samples present nano-
structures with a spherical morphology with no evidence of
particle aggregation. The sizes of the optimum C-PNP9 and B-PNP9
are 189.0 ± 20.3 nm and 195.9 ± 25.2 nm, respectively. The sizes
obtained from the TEM measurements are in sound accordance
with the results obtained from the particle size measurements by
dynamic light scattering (Table 2).
3.8. In vitro cellular uptake of curcumin
HT-29 human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells were chosen as
target cells to demonstrate the success of using the optimized C-
PNP9 formulation as a formula for improving the cell uptake and
cell internalization of curcumin. Since curcumin was practically
insoluble in water it was necessary to prepare the pure curcumin
reference solution by dissolving it in an aqueous solution of DMSO
(1.4% V/V). Fig. 3C shows the curcumin cell uptake in HT-29 cells
when the same absolute amount of curcumin (200 mg) was incu-
bated with the cells in the form of the pure reference solution and
the optimized C-PNP9 formulation. The curcumin uptake by HT-
29 cells in case of native curcumin solution and the optimized C-
PNP9 formulation after 2 h was 3.7 ± 0.6 and 7.0 ± 0.3 mg per
Table 3
Composition of factors and responses for the optimized C-PNP9 formulation.
Independent Variable
Low
High
Optimum
X1: Amount of PLGA in organic Phase
100 mg
200 mg
176.8 mg
X2: Concentration of PVA in Aqueous Phase
2%
4%
2%
X3: Amount of Curcumin in organic phase
10 mg
20 mg
16.6 mg
Response
Predicted
Observed
Residual
Y1: Particle size
202.3 nm
219.6 nm
17.3
Y2: Zeta potential
39.7 mV
36.8 mV
2.9
Y3: Entrapment Efﬁciency
76.4%
74.4%
2.0
Y4: Cumulative drug release after 24 h.
50.4%
56.2%
5.8
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
15

106 cells, respectively. Thus, the optimized C-PNP9 formulation
displayed a higher curcumin uptake with a signiﬁcant difference
when compared with the pure curcumin reference solution
(P ¼ 0.00059 at a signiﬁcance level of 0.001).
3.9. In vitro stability studies of C-PNP formulations
The stability of all of the C-PNP formulations in this study was
investigated by storing the samples for 2 months at room tem-
perature and at 4 C. Table S4 summarizes the particle sizes and PDI
values of the C-PNP formulations measured after one month and
two months of storage. The particle size and PDI of the different C-
PNP formulations have clearly remained within a good range,
which indicates a good long term stability of all the C-PNP for-
mulations prepared in this study.
In view of oral delivery we also examined the colloidal stability
of the optimized C-PNP formulation in a GI tract environment by
using simulated gastric ﬂuid (SGF) with and without enzyme and
simulated intestinal ﬂuid (SIF) with bile salt. The optimized C-PNP9
formulation was incubated at 37 C in different pH media (i.e. 1.2,
6.8 and 7.4) with and without enzyme in order to mimic the
simulated GI ﬂuids: SGF, SIF and SCF. The colloidal stability of the
optimized C-PNP9 was then monitored by measuring the particle
size during incubation in 1) SGF without enzyme for one day, 2) SGF
with pepsin for 2 h and 3) SIF with bile salt for 6 h. As can be seen
from Tables S5 and S6, no signiﬁcant changes in particle size and
PDI were observed for the optimized C-PNP9 formulation incubated
at 37 C either with SGF with or without enzyme, or with SIF
containing bile salt.
4. Discussion
Nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems are of high impor-
tance because they can signiﬁcantly affect the stability and func-
tionality and also the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
the drug of interest. In a quest of developing an optimum oral
formulation for colon treatment, we have prepared a series of
curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles (C-PNPs) and used a 23
factorial design approach to achieve a small size, maximum
entrapment efﬁciency and speciﬁc maximal release of curcumin in
a colonic environment. The C-PNPs were successfully obtained with
the single-emulsion solvent-evaporation method. PVA was used as
the emulsiﬁer since it has widely been used as a stabilizer for PLGA
polymers and other pharmaceutical formulations. PLGA was chosen
as a carrier matrix due to its many advantages and attractive
properties. Namely, PLGA i) is a biodegradable polymer with good
biocompatibility, ii) is approved by FDA and EMEA for drug delivery
systems, iii) has well described formulation methods which are
Fig. 2. A) FT-IR spectra of curcumin powder, acid terminated PLGA powder, blank optimized nanoparticle without curcumin (B-PNP9) and optimized curcumin-loaded nanoparticle
(C-PNP9). B) DSC Thermograms of curcumin powder, acid terminated PLGA powder, blank optimized nanoparticle (B-PNP9) and optimized C-PNP9 formulation.
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
16

easy to adapt to various types of drugs e.g. hydrophilic or hydro-
phobic small molecules or macromolecules, iv) has the ability to
protect the encapsulated drug from degradation, v) enables the
preparation of sustained release formulations, vi) provides the
possibility to easily modify surface properties to introduce stealth
properties and/or better interaction with biological materials and
vii) allows to develop targeted nanoparticles to speciﬁc organs or
cells [26]. Moreover, PLGA degrades into nontoxic lactic acid and
glycolic acid in the body. PLGA has also been shown to be a suitable
matrix for encapsulating
lipophilic
drugs
[39].
Furthermore,
biodegradable polymers, such as PLGA, often keep their rigidity in
physiological temperatures, thus preventing detergents and bile
salts to permeate into the polymer matrix. This in combination with
the fact that PLGA can be tuned to degrade at a speciﬁc pH makes it
a highly suitable matrix for oral drug delivery purposes where it is
of utmost importance to protect the drug of interest from the harsh
environment in the stomach and the intestine that contain a lot of
enzymes and detergents.
Particle size and size distribution (PDI) are important parame-
ters when developing suitable nanomedicines for therapeutic
purposes. They determine the in vivo distribution, toxicity and the
targeting ability of nanoparticle systems and consequently the fate
of administered nanoparticles by inﬂuencing their pharmacoki-
netics, including the time of circulation, absorption and distribution
[40,41]. In addition, particle size and size distribution can also in-
ﬂuence the drug loading, drug release and stability of drug inside
nanoparticles [42]. Moreover, the size of the particles inﬂuences
substantially their ability to act as drug delivery vehicles. For
example, 0.1 mm sized nanoparticles have shown to have about a
10-fold higher intracellular uptake in an in vitro cell culture model
compared to 10 mm-sized microparticles [43]. Furthermore, nano-
particles which are smaller than 0.1 mm have been reported to have
about a 27-fold higher transfection efﬁcacy than nanoparticles
which are larger than 0.1 mm [44]. A recent study has also
demonstrated that nanoparticles smaller than 200 nm are distrib-
uted more efﬁciently in tumors than larger ones [45]. Particle size
governs the distribution of nanoparticles in the body and smaller
particles are considered to be more efﬁcient for passive targeting to
tumor tissues through the enhanced permeability and retention
effect [46]. Thus, by reducing the particle size of a drug delivery
system and by using nanosized formulations the colonic residence
time is believed to increase, but they can also provide additional
beneﬁts for cancer therapy, such as a selective accumulation in
inﬂamed tissues. Reducing the size of an oil-in-water emulsion has
been shown to be an efﬁcient approach for preparing polymer-
based nanoparticle drug delivery systems, especially for lipophilic
drugs such as curcumin. The particle size and PDI values for all of
the C-PNPs in this study clearly show that they are all homogeneous
nanoformulations in the size range 180e210 nm (Table 2). This was
also conﬁrmed by the TEM images of the blank and curcumin-
loaded optimized C-PNP formulations (Fig. 3A and B). These re-
sults are in good agreement with other studies showing similar
morphology of PLGA NPs with sizes between 100 and 163 nm
[15,20,37,47,48].
Zeta potential, on the other hand, is a measure of the surface
charge of the particles, which in turn determines the stability of
colloidal suspensions, and mucoadhesion properties of particles
[49]. The surface charge of the particles controls their stability in
nanoparticulate formulations through strong electrostatic re-
pulsions between the particles. Therefore, the zeta potential values,
Fig. 3. A TEM image of A) blank optimum nanoparticles without curcumin (B-PNP9) and B) optimized curcumin loaded PLGA nanoparticles (C-PNP9). C) In vitro HT-29 cell uptake of
curcumin from pure curcumin solution and the optimized C-PNP9 formulation (n ¼ 3).
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
17

irrespective of charge type, either positive or negative, should
preferentially be high (i.e. > 30 mV) in order to ensure stability and
avoid aggregation of the particles. Moreover, surface charge plays a
key role in the cellular uptake and intra-cellular distribution of
nanoparticles [46,50]. PLGA nanoparticles are in general negatively
charged due to the dissociation of the free terminal carboxylic
group of the acid-terminated PLGA polymer. Table 2 shows that the
C-PNPs in this study display a sufﬁciently high negative zeta po-
tential to ensure that the nanoparticles will disperse very well in
the aqueous media and that the nanosuspensions will have a very
good stability and tolerance against aggregation.
Determination of the encapsulation parameters, particularly the
EE% for nanoparticle formulations is of utmost importance for
evaluating the therapeutic efﬁcacy of a drug delivery system. It is
generally recognized that the encapsulation efﬁciency of a chemical
compound in PLGA polymers correlates with the concentration,
molecular weight, and volume ratio of PLGA [51,52]. The EE%s of
curcumin for the C-PNPs prepared in this study were between 58
and 83% (Table 2). A recent study has reported a curcumin EE% of up
to 92% for PLGA-based nanoparticles for oral delivery [38]. The
higher curcumin EE% in that particular study compared to the C-
PNPs prepared in the current study can be due to the use of PLGA
and PVA of different molecular weights and/or a different prepa-
ration technique (i.e. solid-in-oil-in-water solvent evaporation
technique). However, other studies that have used the same tech-
nique as the current study for preparing PLGA-based nanoparticles
for oral delivery of curcumin and another poorly soluble drug gli-
pizide have reported EE%s of 76% and 16e57%, respectively [27,28].
Thus, the EE%s of the C-PNPs in this study can be considered to be
sufﬁciently high for oral delivery. The high EE% can be attributed to
several factors. Firstly, the hydrophobic nature of PLGA molecules
makes it relatively easy to entrap lipophilic curcumin into PLGA.
Secondly, there is a favorable interaction taking place between the
phenolic hydroxyl of curcumin and the carboxylic groups of PLGA.
Thirdly, the lipophilic nature of curcumin and consequently its low
solubility in aqueous solutions results in a minimal loss of the drug
to the external aqueous phase during the formulation process.
A sustained and triggered release of the drug in a delivery sys-
tem is an important property closely related to its pharmacoki-
netics and efﬁcacy. The in vitro release characteristics of the C-PNPs
in Fig.1 show that practically no curcumin was released from any of
the C-PNP formulations in the SGF medium (~zero), whereas a
slight release of curcumin took place in the SIF (i.e. < 5% of curcu-
min released). Once the pH reached neutral values (i.e. pH 7.4),
curcumin was, however, rapidly released in a biphasic manner
reaching a sustained release of 34e63% after 24 h. This behavior
differs from the one presented in the study by Xie et al. [38] where a
burst release of curcumin of up to 25% and a sustained release of
48% at pH ¼ 2 were reported for PLGA-based NPs for oral admin-
istration. Furthermore, Xie et al. [38] and Cartiera et al. [27] re-
ported that curcumin-loaded PLGA-based NPs for oral delivery
released curcumin in a biphasic manner reaching a sustained
release of ~55% and ~20% after 24 h. Thus, it can be concluded that
the sustained release of curcumin from the C-PNPs in this study is
high and in good agreement with other similar studies. The fact
that negligible amounts of curcumin were released in the pH range
2e6.8 clearly shows that a triggered release of curcumin from the
C-PNPs in an environment mimicking the colon is taking place, and
that the amount of curcumin released is substantially higher in a
colonic environment than in an environment mimicking the
stomach or small intestine. This means that the main absorption of
curcumin from the C-PNP formulations should take place in the
large intestine, and not in the stomach or small intestine, unless the
C-PNPs are taken up earlier in the villi of the small intestine.
However, the uptake of the C-PNPs before they reach the colon
could possibly be minimized by a proper surface functionalization
of the NPs. Thus, the optimized C-PNP9 formulation developed here
should enable a further development of an oral formulation for
triggered, sustained, targeted and effective colon treatment with
curcumin.
The kinetic constants and mode of release obtained from the
release kinetic ﬁts to the in vitro release proﬁles of the C-PNPs
(Fig. 1) are shown in Table S1. The controlled release pattern of
curcumin from the C-PNPs followed mainly the Higuchi diffusion
model with a half-life of 7e29 h. This indicates that a sustained
release of curcumin from the C-PNPs mainly takes place by diffu-
sion from the PLGA matrix and not through extensive degradation/
erosion processes of the PLGA nanoparticles. This is in sound
accordance with the fact that degradation of PLGA can last from
weeks to months [52], and if the diffusion of the drug is faster than
the matrix degradation, then the mechanism of drug release should
occur mainly by diffusion [23,53]. The release mechanism of the C-
PNPs is in good agreement with recent studies that have reported
that drug-loaded PLGA NPs exhibit a controlled release pattern
following the Higuchi diffusion model [17,20,54].
The factorial design analysis approach is a helpful tool during
formulation optimization as it allows elucidating the relationship
between the dependent and independent variables during the
optimization
process.
The
main
effects,
interaction
proﬁles,
response surface and contour plots obtained from the 23 factorial
design analysis of the C-PNPs in this study are shown in Figs. S1eS3.
Table S3 shows the corresponding regression equations for the
responses obtained by analyzing the experimentally determined
input parameters. The coefﬁcients in the regression equations with
more than one factor term represent an interaction term. A positive
value for a response in the regression equation represents an effect
that favors the optimization (synergistic effect), while a negative
value indicates an inverse relationship (antagonistic effect) be-
tween the factors and the response [55]. Thus, the regression
equations in Table S3, and Figs. S1eS3 clearly show that X1 and X3
have the main effects on the dependent parameters while X2 has a
similar effect as X3 but to a lesser extent. X1 and X3 have a positive
effect on Y1 and Y3, while X2 has a negative effect on Y1, Y3 and Y4.
On the other hand, X1 has a positive effect on Y2, while X2 and X3
have a negligible effect on it. The regression equation for particle
size in Table S3 also clearly shows a negative sign for X2 (PVA),
which indicates that the size of the nanoparticles decreases when
the concentration of the stabilizer is increased, whereas a positive
sign for X1 (PLGA) and X3 (curcumin) indicates a positive effect on
the particle size, i.e. an increasing particle size with increasing
concentration. A more detailed discussion concerning the effects of
the independent variables is summarized in the supporting
information.
The observed and predicted physicochemical characteristics, i.e.
values of the dependent responses under investigation for the
optimized C-PNP9 formulation, are shown in Table 3, along with the
residual values. It can clearly be seen that the experimentally
measured and the predicted values are well in line. The fact that the
observed values for particle size, zeta potential, EE % and DR% after
24 h are close to the predicted values validates the successful use of
the 23 factorial design and thus also the equations derived for the
dependent variables.
FT-IR spectroscopy is a technique for identifying the chemical
composition of a material, but can also be used for revealing in-
teractions between materials in formulation mixtures. The opti-
mized C-PNP9 formulation showed characteristic peaks which were
close to the principal IR peaks of the drug (Fig. 2A), conﬁrming the
presence of curcumin in the nanospheres, but also indicating that
there are no strong interactions between the drug and the poly-
mers used for the nanoencapsulation process. Similar results were
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
18

also obtained by Sampath et al. [56] during an FT-IR analysis of
curcumin-loaded PLGA NPs. The DSC measurements (Fig. 2B) did
not detect any crystalline drug material in the optimized C-PNP9
sample as the sharp peak of curcumin was absent. Thus, the ther-
mograms suggest that curcumin is in an amorphous or disordered-
crystalline phase of molecular dispersion form or in a solid solution
state inside the PLGA polymer matrix [48]. The DSC results further
support the FT-IR results that there are no signiﬁcant interactions
between the drug and any other components in the optimized C-
PNP9 formulation. The indication that curcumin was molecularly
dispersed in the PLGA polymer matrix is also supported by the fact
that the release mechanism of curcumin from the optimized C-
PNP9 formulation followed the Higuchi diffusion model. Polakovic
et al. [57] have shown this with lidocaine loaded PNPs. They
concluded that when lidocaine is molecularly dispersed in a poly-
mer matrix its release kinetics ﬁt better to a diffusion model,
whereas if lidocaine is in crystal form within the polymer matrix its
release kinetics could be described by a dissolution model.
The in vitro cell uptake studies in Fig. 3C clearly show an
enhanced uptake of curcumin in HT-29 human colorectal adeno-
carcinoma cells for the optimized C-PNP9 formulation compared to
the native curcumin solution. The enhanced uptake can be attrib-
uted to the small particle size of the optimized C-PNP9 formulation
and the effect of PVA on the ﬂuidity of the cell membrane. In
addition, PLGA-nanoparticles are internalized by cells partly via
ﬂuid-phase pinocytosis as well as via clathrin-mediated endocy-
tosis. This allows PLGA NPs to rapidly escape the endolysosomes
and enter the cytoplasm even within 10 min of incubation. This
facilitates the interactions of PLGA NPs with the vesicular mem-
branes which leads to transient and localized destabilization of the
membrane. This consequently results in the escape of the PLGA NPs
into the cytosol [26,58].
The overall stability of the C-PNPs prepared in this study can be
attributed to their high zeta potential values as well as the pro-
tective effect of PLGA. In general, bile acid affects the GI stability of
polymeric NPs. The optimized C-PNP9 formulation prepared in this
study was, however, expected to be more stable against bile acid
because it consists of PLGA with a transition temperature (Tc) of
52 C, which is much higher than the temperature of the gastro-
intestinal tract. Polymer matrices still keep their rigidity below the
Tc, which means that detergents and bile salts have a harder job to
permeate into the polymer matrix. An increase of PDI of the opti-
mized C-PNP9 formulation incubated in SIF with bile acid for one
hour may still be attributed to the effect of bile salt. In conclusion,
the stability studies revealed a good colloidal stability of the opti-
mized curcumin-loaded PLGA formulation in synthetic gastroin-
testinal ﬂuids, even though a slight increase in size distribution was
observed in presence of bile salt.
5. Conclusions
Curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles for colon delivery were
successfully prepared with the emulsion solvent evaporation
technique. The use of the 23 factorial design model enabled
development
of
an
optimized
curcumin-loaded
PLGA-based
nanoformulation using minimum amount of raw materials and
minimum time. On the basis of the optimization criteria it was
found that the composition of the optimized formulation should
contain 176.8 mg PLGA, 2% PVA and 16.6 mg curcumin. The
observed responses of particle size (~220 nm), zeta potential
(>-30 mV), EE% (>70%) and drug release after 48 h (>70%) corre-
lated well with the predicted values obtained from the 23 factorial
design model. DSC studies conﬁrmed the presence of curcumin in
an
amorphous
or
disordered-crystalline
phase
of
molecular
dispersion form or in a solid solution state in the polymer matrix.
FT-IR studies conﬁrmed that there are no substantial interactions
between curcumin and PLGA. TEM images of the optimized blank
(B-PNP9) and curcumin-loaded PLGA NPs (C-PNP9) revealed that
the NPs were discrete, non-aggregated, spherical in shape, and
displayed a good size distribution. The results of small size, sus-
tained release, good colloidal stability in synthetic gastrointestinal
ﬂuids, long term stability and a clearly higher cellular uptake in HT-
29 cells compared to pure curcumin solution show that the opti-
mized curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticle formulation (C-PNP9)
has high potential as an initial platform for a further development
of an efﬁcient oral-targeted drug delivery system to the colon,
especially if it is further functionalized with a mucoadhesive
polymer (e.g. chitosan) or a speciﬁc targeting ligand (e.g. wheat
germ agglutinin or specially designed peptides for colon targeting).
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by Center for International Mobility
CIMO, Egypt (Grant No. KM-14-9066) and Academy of Finland
(Grant Nos. 137 053 and 263861). We also want to address our
special thanks to Tiina Lipi€ainen and Sara Fraser for their kind help
with the experimental work of the DSC and FTIR studies, respec-
tively. The Electron Microscopy Unit of University of Helsinki is
acknowledged for help with acquiring the TEM images.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2016.01.007.
References
[1] American
Cancer
Society.
http://www.cancer.org/cancer/
colonandrectumcancer/detailedguide/colorectal-cancer-key-statistics,
2015.
Last accessed 21.10.2015.
[2] M. Das, C. Mohanty, S.K. Sahoo, Ligand-based targeted therapy for cancer
tissue, Expert Opin. Drug. Deliv. 6 (2009) 285e304.
[3] S.K. Sahoo, S. Parveen, J. Panda, The present and future of nanotechnology in
human health care, Nanomedicine 3 (2007) 20e31.
[4] B.B. Aggarwal, K.B. Harikumar, Potential therapeutic effects of curcumin, the
anti-inﬂammatory agent, against neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, pulmo-
nary, metabolic, autoimmune and neoplastic diseases, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.
41 (2009) 40e59.
[5] R.A. Fryer, C. Galustian, A.G. Dalgelish, Recent advances and developments in
treatment strategies against pancreatic cancer, Curr. Clin. Pharmacol. 4 (2009)
102e112.
[6] X.
Gao, J.
Kuo, H.
Jiang,
D.
Deeb,
Y.
Liu, G.
Divine,
R.A.
Chapman,
S.A. Dulchavsky, S.C. Gautam, Immunomodulatory activity of curcumin: sup-
pression of lymphocyte proliferation, development of cell-mediated cytotox-
icity, and cytokine production in vitro, Biochem. Pharmacol. 68 (2004) 51e61.
[7] A.P. Lakshmanan, K. Watanabe, R.A. Thandavarayan, F.R. Sari, H. Meilei,
V. Soetikno, S. Arumugam, V.V. Giridharan, K. Suzuki, M. Kodama, Curcumin
attenuates hyperglycaemia-mediated AMPK activation and oxidative stress in
cerebrum of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat, Free Radic. Res. 45 (2011)
788e795.
[8] R. De, P. Kundu, S. Swarnakar, T. Ramamurthy, A. Chowdhury, G.B. Nair,
A.K. Mukhopadhyay, Antimicrobial activity of curcumin against Helicobacter
pylori isolates from India and during infections in mice, Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 53 (2009) 1592e1597.
[9] Z.M. Shao, Z.Z. Shen, C.H. Liu, M.R. Sartippour, V.L. Go, D. Heber, M. Nguyen,
Curcumin exerts multiple suppressive effects on human breast carcinoma
cells, Int. J. Cancer 98 (2002) 234e240.
[10] S. Bisht, G. Feldmann, S. Soni, R. Ravi, C. Karikar, A. Maitra, A. Maitra, Polymeric
nanoparticle-encapsulated curcumin (‘nanocurcumin’): a novel strategy for
human cancer therapy, J. Nanobiotechnol. 5 (2007) 3.
[11] R.K. Maheshwari, A.K. Singh, J. Gaddipati, R.C. Srimal, Multiple biological ac-
tivities of curcumin: a short review, Life Sci. 78 (2006) 2081e2087.
[12] S. Lev-Ari, L. Strier, D. Kazanov, L. Madar-Shapiro, H. Dvory-Sobol, I. Pinchuk,
B. Marian, D. Lichtenberg, N. Arber, Celecoxib and curcumin synergistically
inhibit the growth of colorectal cancer cells, Clin. Cancer Res. 11 (2005)
6738e6744.
[13] W.W. Quitschke, in: M. Diederich, K. Noworyta (Eds.), Ch 5, Bioavailability and
metabolism of curcuminoids in Natural Compounds as Inducers of Cell Death,
vol. 1, Springer, 2012.
[14] H. Kharkwal, K. Bala, D.D. Joshi, D. Pande Katare, Bioavailability enhancement
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
19

of curcuminoids using natural polymer, Der Pharm. Lett. 4 (2012) 1698e1711.
[15] P. Anand, H.B. Nair, B. Sung, A.B. Kunnumakkara, V.R. Yadav, R.R. Tekmal,
B.B. Aggarwal, Design of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles formulation
with enhanced cellular uptake, and increased bioactivity in vitro and superior
bioavailability in vivo, Biochem. Pharmacol. 79 (2010) 330e338.
[16] A. Lazar, S. Mourtas,
I.
Youssef, C. Parizot,
A. Dauphin, B.
Delatour,
S.G. Antimisiaris, C. Duyckaerts, Curcumin-conjugated nanoliposomes with
high afﬁnity for Ab deposits: possible applications to Alzheimer disease,
Nanomed. Nanotechnol. 9 (2013) 712e721.
[17] M.M. Yallapu, M. Jaggi, S.C. Chauhan, Curcumin nanoformulations: a future
nanomedicine for cancer, Drug Discov. Today 17 (2012) 71e80.
[18] M. Gou, K. Men, H. Shi, M. Xiang, J. Zhang, J. Song, J. Long, Y. Wan, F. Luo,
X. Zhao, Z. Qian, Curcumin-loaded biodegradable polymeric micelles for colon
cancer therapy in vitro and in vivo, Nanoscale 3 (2011) 1558e1567.
[19] A.O. Elzoghby, W.M. Samy, N.A. Elgindy, Albumin-based nanoparticles as
potential controlled release drug delivery systems, J. Control. Release 157
(2012) 168e182.
[20] Y.M. Tsai, C.F. Chien, L.C. Lina, T.H. Tsai, Curcumin and its nano-formulation:
the kinetics of tissue distribution and blood-brain barrier penetration, Int. J.
Pharm. 416 (2011) 331e338.
[21] K. Ganguly, T.M. Aminabhavi, A.R. Kulkarni, Colon targeting of 5-Fluorouracil
using polyethylene glycol cross-linked chitosan microspheres enteric coated
with
cellulose
acetate
phthalate,
Ind.
Eng.
Chem.
Res.
50
(2011)
11797e11807.
[22] D. Peer, J.M. Karp, S. Hong, O.C. Farokhzad, R. Margalit, R. Langer, Nanocarriers
as an emerging platform for cancer therapy, Nat. Nanotech 2 (2007) 751e760.
[23] K.S. Soppimath, T.M. Aminabhavi, A.R. Kulkarni, W.E. Rudzinski, Biodegrad-
able polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery devices, J. Control. Release 70
(2001) 1e20.
[24] N.M. Khalil, T.C. do Nascimento, D.M. Casa, L.F. Dalmolin, A.C. de Mattos,
I. Hoss, M.A. Romano, R.M. Mainardes, Pharmacokinetics of curcumin-loaded
PLGA and PLGAePEG blend nanoparticles after oral administration in rats,
Coll. Surf. B Biointerface 101 (2013) 353e360.
[25] R.C. Mundargi, V.R. Babu, V. Rangaswamy, P. Patel, T.M. Aminabhavi, Nano/
micro technologies for delivering macromolecular therapeutics using poly(D,
L-lactide-co-glycolide) and its derivatives, J. Control. Release 125 (2008)
193e209.
[26] F. Danhier, E. Ansorena, J.M. Silva, R. Coco, A. Le Breton, V. Preat, PLGA-based
nanoparticles: an overview of biomedical applications, J. Control. Release 161
(2012) 505e522.
[27] M.S. Cartiera, E.C. Ferreira, C. Caputo, M.E. Egan, M.J. Caplan, W.M. Saltzman,
Partial correction of cystic ﬁbrosis defects with PLGA nanoparticles encap-
sulating curcumin, Mol. Pharm. 7 (2009) 86e93.
[28] S. Jain, S. Saraf, Inﬂuence of processing variables and in vitro characterization
of glipizide loaded biodegradable nanoparticles, Diab. Metabol. Syndr. Clin.
Res. Rev. 3 (2009) 113e117.
[29] T. Ma, L. Wang, T. Yang, G. Ma, S. Wang, Homogeneous PLGA-lipid nano-
particles as a promising oral vaccine delivery system for ovalbumin, Asian J.
Pharm. Sci. 9 (2014) 129e136.
[30] A. Zanotto-Filho, K. Coradini, E. Braganhol, R. Schr€oder, C.M. de Oliveiram,
A. Sim~oes-Pires, A.M. Battastini, A.R. Pohlmann, S.S. Guterres, C.M. Forcelini,
R.C. Beck, J.C. Moreira, Curcumin-loaded lipid-core nanocapsules as a strategy
to improve pharmacological efﬁcacy of curcumin in glioma treatment, Eur. J.
Pharm. Biopharm. 83 (2013) 156e167.
[31] USP 36 NF 31. United State Pharmacopeia and National Formulary, 2013.
[32] N.T. Paragkumar, D. Edith, J.-L. Six, Surface characteristics of PLA and PLGA
ﬁlms, Appl. Surf. Sci. 253 (2006) 2758e2764.
[33] R. Benassi, E. Ferrari, S. Lazzari, F. Spagnolo, M. Saladini, Theoretical study on
Curcumin: a comparison of calculated spectroscopic properties with NMR,
UVevis and IR experimental data, J. Mol. Struct. 892 (2008) 168e176.
[34] T.M. Kolev, E.A. Velcheva, B.A. Stamboliyska, M. Spiteller, DFT and experi-
mental studies of the structure and vibrational spectra of curcumin, Int,
J. Quantum Chem. 102 (2005) 1069e1079.
[35] A.
Anitha,
M.
Sreeranganathan,
K.P.
Chennazhi,
V.K.
Lakshmanan,
R. Jayakumar, In vitro combinatorial anticancer effects of 5-ﬂuorouracil and
curcumin loaded N, O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles toward colon
cancer and in vivo pharmacokinetic studies, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 88
(2014) 238e251.
[36] K. Renuka, M. Ramakant, V. Ashwni, D. Pankaj, K. Vivek, G. Varsha,
K.P. Sarvesh, R.M. Prabhat, K.D. Anil, Colon-speciﬁc delivery of curcumin by
exploiting Eudragit-decorated chitosan nanoparticles in vitro and in vivo,
J. Nanopart. Res. 15 (2013) 1893.
[37] A. Mukerjee, J.K. Vishwanatha, Formulation, characterization and evaluation
of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanospheres for cancer therapy, Anticancer Res. 29
(2009) 3867e3875.
[38] X. Xie, Q. Tao, Y. Zou, F. Zhang, M. Guo, Y. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, S. Yu, PLGA
nanoparticles improve the oral bioavailability of curcumin in rats: charac-
terizations and mechanisms, J. Agric. Food Chem. 59 (2011) 9280e9289.
[39] C. Wang, P.C. Ho, L.Y. Lim, Wheat germ agglutinin-conjugated PLGA nano-
particles for enhanced intracellular delivery of paclitaxel to colon cancer cells,
Int. J. Pharm. 400 (2010) 201e210.
[40] D.P.
Lankveld,
A.G.
Oomen,
P.
Krystek,
A.
Neigh,
A.
Troost-de
Jong,
C.W. Noorlander, J.C. Van Eijkeren, R.E. Geertsma, W.H. De Jong, The kinetics
of the tissue distribution of silver nanoparticles of different sizes, Biomaterials
31 (2010) 8350e8361.
[41] S.A. Kulkarni, S.-S. Feng, Effects of particle size and surface modiﬁcation on
cellular uptake and biodistribution of polymeric nanoparticles for drug de-
livery, Pharm. Res. 30 (2013) 2512e2522.
[42] V.J. Mohanraj, Y. Chen, Nanoparticles: a review, Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 5 (2006)
561e573.
[43] M.P. Desai, V. Labhasetwar, E. Walter, R.J. Levy, G.L. Amidon, The mechanism
of uptake of biodegradable microparticles in Caco-2 cells is size dependent,
Pharm. Res. 14 (1997) 1568e1573.
[44] S. Prabha, W.-Z. Zhou, J. Panyam, V. Labhasetwar, Size-dependency of
nanoparticle-mediated gene transfection: studies with fractionated nano-
particles, Int. J. Pharm. 244 (2002) 105e115.
[45] C. He, Y. Hu, L. Yin, C. Tang, C. Yin, Effects of particle size and surface charge on
cellular uptake and biodistribution of polymeric nanoparticles, Biomaterials
31 (2010) 3657e3666.
[46] F. Akhtar, M.A. Rizvi, S.K. Kar, Oral delivery of curcumin bound to chitosan
nanoparticles cured Plasmodium yoelii infected mice, Biotech. Adv. 30 (2012)
310e320.
[47] S. Abbas, E. Karangwa, M. Bashari, K. Hayat, X. Hong, H.R. Sharif, X. Zhang,
Fabrication of polymeric nanocapsules from curcumin-loaded nanoemulsion
templates by self-assembly, Ultrason. Sonochem. 23 (2014) 81e92.
[48] K.L. Nair, A.K. Thulasidasan, G. Deepa, R.J. Anto, G.S. Kumar, Purely aqueous
PLGA nanoparticulate formulations of curcumin exhibit enhanced anticancer
activity with dependence on the combination of the carrier, Int. J. Pharm. 425
(2012) 44e52.
[49] J. Vandervoort, A. Ludwig, Biocompatible stabilizers in the preparation of
PLGA nanoparticles: a factorial design study, Int. J. Pharm. 238 (2002) 77e92.
[50] J. Panyam, W.Z. Zhou, S. Prabha, S.K. Sahoo, V. Labhasetwar, Rapid endo-
lysosomal escape of poly (D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles: implica-
tions for drug and gene delivery, FASEB J. 16 (2002) 1217e1226.
[51] C.E. Astete, C.M. Sabliov, Synthesis and characterization of PLGA nanoparticles,
J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 17 (2006) 247e289.
[52] C. Wischke, S.P. Schwendeman, Principles of encapsulating hydrophobic drugs
in PLA/PLGA microparticles, Int. J. Pharm. 364 (2008) 298e327.
[53] T. Niwa, H. Takeuchi, T. Hino, N. Kunou, Y. Kawashima, Preparations of
biodegradable nanospheres of water-soluble and insoluble drugs with D, L-
lactide/glycolide copolymer by a novel spontaneous emulsiﬁcation solvent
diffusion method, and the drug release behaviour, J. Control. Release 25
(1993) 89e98.
[54] K.K.
Chereddy,
R.
Coco,
P.B.
Memvanga,
B.
Ucakar,
A.
des
Rieux,
G. Vandermeulen, V. Preat, Combined effect of PLGA and curcumin on wound
healing activity, J. Control. Release 171 (2013) 208e215.
[55] Y. Duan, S. Xu, Q. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, Optimization of preparation of DHAQ-
loaded PEG-PLGA-PEG nonaparticles using central composite design, J. Mater.
Sci. Mater. Med. 17 (2006) 559e563.
[56] M. Sampath, R. Lakra, P. Korrapati, B. Sengottuvelan, Curcumin loaded poly
(lactic-co-glycolic) acid nanoﬁber for the treatment of carcinoma, Coll. Surf. B
Biointerface 117 (2014) 128e134.
[57] M. Polakovc, T. G€orner, R. Gref, E. Dellacherie, Lidocaine loaded biodegradable
nanospheres II. Modelling of drug release, J. Control. Release 60 (1999)
169e177.
[58] J.K. Vasir, V. Labhasetwar, Biodegradable nanoparticles for cytosolic delivery
of therapeutics, Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev. 59 (2007) 718e728.
M.A. Akl et al. / Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 32 (2016) 10e20
20