RESEARCH PAPER
Budesonide Loaded PLGA Nanoparticles for Targeting
the Inflamed Intestinal Mucosa—Pharmaceutical
Characterization and Fluorescence Imaging
Hussain Ali 1,2 & Benno Weigmann 3 & Eva-Maria Collnot 4 & Saeed Ahmad Khan 5 & Maike Windbergs 2,4 & Claus-Michael Lehr 2,4
Received: 17 November 2015 /Accepted: 23 December 2015 /Published online: 30 December 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016
ABSTRACT
Purpose The purpose of this study was to evaluate the specif-
ically targeted efficiency of budesonide loaded PLGA nano-
particles for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD).
Methods The nanoparticles were prepared by an oil/water
(O/W) emulsion evaporation technique. The nanoparticles
were characterized for their size, shape and in vitro drug release
profile. Solid state characterization was carried out by differ-
ential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray Power diffrac-
tion (XPRD). In order to evaluate the targeted efficiency of
nanoparticles, a particle localization study in the healthy and
in the inflamed colon was determined in vivo. These data were
complemented by cryo-sections.
Results Nanoparticles were 200 ± 05 nm in size with a
smooth and spherical shape. The encapsulation efficiency
was around 85±3.5%, which was find-out by both, direct
and indirect methods. Release of budesonide from the nano-
particles showed a biphasic release profile with an initial burst
followed by sustained release. XPRD data revealed that the
drug in the polymer matrix existed in crystalline state. Nano-
particles accumulation in inflamed tissues was evaluated by in-
vivo imaging system and it was found that particles are accu-
mulated in abundance at the site of inflammation when com-
pared to the healthy group.
Conclusion The study demonstrates that the budesonide
loaded PLGA nanoparticles are an efficient delivery system
for targeted drug delivery to the inflamed intestinal mucosa.
KEY WORDS budesonide . colitis . DSC . nanoparticles .
oxazolone . sustained drug release . XRD
ABBREVIATIONS
AFM
Atomic force microscopy
CD
Crohn’s disease
DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry
GIT
Gastrointestinal tract
IBD
Inflammatory bowel disease
O/W
Oil/water
PBS
Phosphate buffer saline
PDI
Poly-dispersity index
PLGA
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
PVA
Poly-vinyl alcohol
SD
Standard deviation
SEM
Scanning electron microscope
UC
Ulcerative colitis
XRD
X-ray diffraction
INTRODUCTION
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) comprises a group of
chronic and idiopathic inflammation conditions of the gastro-
intestinal tract (GIT). The two most commonly studied types
are Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Both,
CD and UC are chronic and relapsing inflammatory bowel
* Claus-Michael Lehr
claus-michael.lehr@helmholtz-hzi.de
1
Department of Pharmacy, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320,
Pakistan
2
Biopharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, Saarland University,
Campus A4.1, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
3
Medical Clinic I, University Hospital Erlangen, Research Campus,
91052 Erlangen, Germany
4
Department of Drug Delivery (DDEL), Helmholtz Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz Centre for Infection
Research (HZI), Saarland University, Campus E 8.1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
5
Department of Pharmacy, Kohat University of Science and Technology,
Kohat, KPK, Pakistan
Pharm Res (2016) 33:1085–1092
DOI 10.1007/s11095-015-1852-6

diseases. CD can occur in any part of the GIT but most com-
monly it has been diagnosed in the terminal ileum and colon,
whereas, UC is restricted to the descending colon and trans-
verse colon (1–3). The pathogenesis of IBD is not yet fully
understood; however, various environmental and genetic fac-
tors play an important role (4,5). Incidence rates for IBD are
higher in North America and Europe compared to Asia and
Africa (6). The main aim of the therapy in IBD is to induce a
clinical remission and to maintain this state for an extended
period of time. The chosen treatment depends on the severity
and location of the disease. The available therapeutic options,
for example 5-amino-salicylic acid and corticosteroids are
commonly used to control the disease and to maintain its
remission (7,8).
In contrast to other corticosteroids, budesonide is the drug
of choice for inflammatory disorders such as IBD, asthma and
arthritis (9). In mild to moderate cases the standard therapeu-
tic dose of budesonide consists of 9 mg per day (10). However,
budesonide has demonstrated stronger adverse effects com-
pared to other corticosteroids (11), which can be minimized
by selective delivery of drug to its site of action. Budesonide
can be given either by oral, rectal or in some cases by intrave-
nous route. The oral route has some limitations as the drug
has to face the harsh environment of the GIT. For this reason
higher doses of corticosteroids will be required which tend to
evoke systemic adverse effects. The rectal route has considered
being effective when the inflammation is located at the distal
part of the colon mainly in UC (12), but this route is not
efficient when the inflammation occurs in the upper part of
the colon. Many drug delivery strategies such as pro drug,
enteric coated capsule or tablets, granules or pellets have been
tried to reduce the toxicity and improve therapeutic efficacy.
But these approaches showed limited bioavailability and are
quickly excreted via diarrhea, a common symptom of IBD
(13).
A carrier system capable to deliver the drug exclusively to
the target site would be a most desirable alternative. In this
context, nanoparticle-based drug delivery offers a promising
and encouraging approach for the selective IBD treatment.
Further, nanoparticles can accumulate to a greater extent in
the inflamed intestinal mucosa and thus prolong the residence
time at the site of inflammation (14,15). Moreover, it has been
reported that nanocarriers can be taken up to a significant
extent by the immune regulating cells in IBD. By the degra-
dation of the nanocarriers, the encapsulated drug is then re-
leased at the desired site (16). This targeted approach was
successfully applied for specific delivery of various drugs for
the treatment of IBD, using different nanocarriers and tech-
nologies (17–19). On the basis of the aforementioned research
studies, a carrier system for the delivery of budesonide to the
inflamed intestinal mucosa was designed. Budesonide was
loaded into fluoresceinamine labeled poly (L-lactide-co-
glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles and was characterized for
their size, shape, morphology and drug release. After
pharmaceutical characterization, the nano formulation was
studied with regard to their localization in inflamed and
healthy mice model to further confirm their local action. In
a previous study (20) we have shown the effectiveness and
localized action of budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles
in different colitis mice models. The focus of the present study
is therefore on an in-depth pharmaceutical characterization of
budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles as would be neces-
sary to take such formulation into subsequent clinical trials.
Moreover, we provide additional evidence for the accumula-
tion of such nanocarriers at the site of inflammation by in-vivo
fluorescence imaging in a relevant mouse model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
The biodegradable polymer poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) (50:50 lactide: glycolide) polymer, xResomer® was
provided by Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany. Budesonide
was received from Sigma-Aldrich, Germany. Poly (vinyl alco-
hol) (PVA) MW 31000 was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich
Mowiol® 4-88, Germany. The organic solvent, ethyl acetate
and all other chemical reagents were purchased from Merck,
Germany and were of analytical grade. Acetonitrile and phos-
phate buffer PH 3 (40:60) was used as mobile phase in HPLC
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Germany. Deionized
water was used throughout the experiment. The in vitro drug
release measurements were carried out at pH 6.8 at 37°C in
phosphate buffer medium.
Methods
Preparation of PLGA Nanoparticles
Fluoresceinamine labeling of PLGA (F-PLGA) was prepared
as described previously (21). Nanoparticles were prepared
from F-PLGA polymer, according to an emulsion solvent
evaporation method (22). In brief, the methodology was per-
formed as follows: 10 mg of budesonide was dissolved in 5 ml
of organic solvent (ethyl acetate) containing 100 mg PLGA at
room temperature. Thereafter, this organic solution was slow-
ly added to 2% aqueous solution of PVA, using a gear pump
(Gilson Minipuls, France). The emulsion was stirred for
30 min at room temperature before homogenizing at 13,
500 rpm for 10 min using an Ultra Turrax T-25 (Janke and
Kunkle GmbH KG, Staufen, Germany). Water was added to
this emulsion under stirring to improve evaporation. Stirring
was continued at room temperature until evaporation of or-
ganic solvents was completed.
1086
Ali et al.

Nanoparticles Characterization
The size and the zeta potential of the particles were measured
on a Malvern zetasizer 2000 HS (Malvern, UK). Size mea-
surement was performed in triplicate at room temperature
and results were expressed in mean ± standard deviation
(SD) (Table I). The Zeta potential (ζ) was also measured in
triplicate using a disposable zeta cuvette. The external mor-
phology of NPs was analyzed by AFM (atomic force micros-
copy) Nanoscope IV Bioscope™(Digital Instruments, Veeco)
in a tapping mode using a Si3N4 cantilever. The nanoparticles
were also analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM). A
drop of nanoparticles was spread on a silicon wafer fixed with
a sample holder for SEM and coated afterwards with gold
using gold sputter in a high vacuum evaporator and observed
on SEM JEOL 7000F (Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 1).
Determination of Drug Encapsulation Efficiency
The drug entrapped in nanoparticles was determined by in-
direct as well as by direct method (Fig. 2). Indirect method
means the amount of drug content measured in the superna-
tant after washing the NPs three times with distilled water,
using a tangential flow apparatus. The samples were then
analyzed by HPLC (UltiMate® 3000 from Dionex). A re-
versed phase C18 Column (4.6×250 mm, pore size 5 μm)
(Merck KGaA, Germany) was used. A mixture of phosphate
buffer (pH 3) and acetonitrile (60:40) was used as a mobile
phase and delivered at a flow rate of 1.900 ml/min. Retention
time for each sample was 6 min. The method was linear
(r2 = 0.9997) over a range from 20 ng/ml to 500 μg/ml.
The limit of detection was 0.01 μg/ml and the limit of quan-
tification was 0.5 μg/ml. The encapsulation efficiency was
calculated with the following formula. After all, the nanopar-
ticle suspension was then freeze-dried for 72 h (GFL Gesell-
schaft für Labortechnik mbH, Germany) to obtain a fine pow-
der of nanoparticles.
encapsulationefficiency %; w=w
ð
Þ ¼ Massof thetotaldrug−Massof freedrug
ð
Þ
Massof totaldrug
 100
Determination of Drug Content
The results of this indirect entrapment assay were then com-
pared to the results obtained by the direct entrapment assay
(Fig. 2) and a good correlation was found for both methods. In
a word, 5 mg of the freeze-dried nanoparticles were dissolved
in ethyl acetate under stirring for 4 to 5 h. Then after complete
evaporation of ethyl acetate the residue was then dissolved in
5 ml of acetonitrile and phosphate buffer (4:6) pH 3 for 2 h.
Afterwards, the solution was filtered, using a disposable sy-
ringe filter paper (CHROMAFIL GF/PET 45/25) pore size
0.45 μm. From the clear filtrate 1 ml sample was collected and
analyzed on HPLC, as described above and calculated with
the following formula.
Drugcontent %; w=w
ð
Þ ¼ Massof thetotaldrug−Massof freedrug
ð
Þ
Massof totalnanoparticles
 100
Percent Yield
The percent yield of the freeze dried nanoparticles was calcu-
lated (Table I) by weighing the total amount of the purified
and freeze dried nanoparticles and calculated by the following
formula.
Yield %
ð
Þ ¼
Massof nanoparticles
Totalmassof drug þ polymer  100
In-Vitro Drug Release
Budesonide release kinetics from F-PLGA nanoparticles was
studied in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) solution pH 6.8
(Fig. 3). Briefly, 5 mg of the nanoparticles were dispersed in
30 ml of PBS solution. Then 1.5 ml from this suspension were
collected at a pre-determined time interval (1, 2 4 6, 24, 48
and 72 h) and centrifuged at 244,000 g for 20 min at 25°C.
1 ml sample from the supernatant was collected for HPLC
analysis and was replaced by an equal amount of fresh PBS
solution.
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
The crystalline state of the drug in the polymer matrix was
evaluated in freeze-dried nanoparticles by differential scan-
ning calorimetry (DSC) (Fig. 4). Thermograms were recorded
using a Perkin Elmer (DSC-7) instrument with a standard
aluminum pan. Nitrogen was the sweeping gas, and the
heating rate was 10°C/min. Samples (2–8 mg) were loaded
in an aluminium pan and sealed. The initial and final temper-
atures were 50°C and 400°C, respectively.
Table I
Average Nanoparticle Size, Polydispersity Index, Encapsulation Efficiency and %yield of Budesonide Loaded PLGA Nanoparticles
Formulation
Average particles
diameter (nm)
Polydispersity
index
Encapsulation
efficiency [% (direct)]
Encapsulation
efficiency [%Indirect]
%Yield
PLGA nanoparticles
200 ± 05
0.05 ± 0.02
85 ± 3.5
89 ± 1.30
96
PLGA Nanoparticles for Targeting the Inflamed Intestinal Mucosa
1087

XPRD (X-ray Powder Diffraction)
An automatic X-ray power diffractometer (Philips PW 3710;
Eindhoven, The Netherlands) equipped with a PW R30 x-ray
generator was used for the XRD study. Nickel-filtered Cu kα1
radiation, having a wavelength of 1.5106 Å was used. The
instrument was operated at 35 kW and 20 mA in the range
(2θ) of 5 to 50° (Fig. 5). The data were obtained over an
angular range from 5 to 50° 2θ using a step size of 0.02° 2θ
and step-time of 10 s, with a non-stop mode.
Animals
BALB/c mice at the age of 8 to 12 weeks were used for ex-
perimental colitis model. All animals were housed under spe-
cific pathogen-free conditions and experiments were per-
formed in accordance with institutional guidelines.
Experimental Colitis Model
Oxazolone-mediated experimental colitis was induced using a
modification of previously described method (23). In brief,
mice were sensitized by epicutaneous application of 150 μl
of 3% oxazolone in acetone/oil suspension (3:1) on day 0
followed by intrarectal administration of 100 μl of 1%
oxazolone solution in 50% ethanol to anesthetized mice on
day 7. Animals received 50% ethanol alone using the same
technique served as controls.
Localization of Nanoparticles in the Murine Gut
To investigate the localization of F-PLGA nanoparticles in the
colon of healthy and inflamed mice, an In-Vivo-Imaging System
(Maestro, CRI Inc., Woburn, MA, USA) was used. After the
induction of colitis, all animals received an equal dose (42 μg/
Fig. 1 Atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy images of nanoparticles prepared by emulsion evaporation.
Fig. 2 Direct and indirect encapsulation efficiency of the budesonide loaded
PLGA nanoparticles.
Fig. 3 In-vitro release of budesonide from PLGA nanoparticles in PBS pH 6.8
(mean, n = 3 ± SD).
1088
Ali et al.

150 μl) of nanoparticles suspension by oral gavage at day 7.
Then, the mice were anesthetized and the abdominal area was
analyzed with regard to fluorescence signals from FITC-
labeled nanoparticles after 18 h. Additionally, cryo-sections
from colon tissue were performed and cell cores were stained
with DAPI (blue fluorescence). Confocal laser scanning mi-
croscopy (Carl Zeiss) was used to further confirm the location
of green fluorescent nanoparticles in the colon tissue. The
experiment was done twice and representative images were
shown. The green positive signals in cryo-sections were further
quantified with Image J software (version 1.46r software, NIH,
USA).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis of the in-vitro and in-vivo data was performed
using student t-test with SigmaPlot (SigmaPlot Software, San
Jose, California).
RESULTS
Nanoparticles Preparation and Characterization
Drug loaded PLGA nanoparticles were prepared by an O/W
emulsion evaporation techniques. The particle size was mea-
sured in triplicate at room temperature. The size of the nano-
particles was approximately 200±05 nm and was mono dis-
persed. The zeta potential of the nanoparticles was nearly zero
and the poly-dispersity index (PDI) was 0.05±0.02 (Table I).
The prepared nano-emulsion was milky white in appearance
and was stable at room temperature. The morphology of the
nanoparticle was studied by SEM and AFM (Fig. 1). It was
observed that the nanoparticles are spherical in shape and
have a smooth surface. The entrapment efficiency was about
85 ± 3.5%, quantified by both direct and indirect assays
(Fig. 2) with a production yield of 94%. In-vitro drug release
profile was measured in PBS at pH 6.8 for 72 h (Fig. 3). The
budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles showed an initial
burst release followed by a slow and sustained drug release
over an extended period of time. The initial burst release was
around 52% in the first hour of the release profile and approx-
imately 58% of drug release was achieved after 72 h.
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)
Measurements
Thermal analysis of the budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparti-
cles, pure drug and their physical mixture were performed
using DSC (Fig. 4). A physical mixture (1:1 w/w) of
budesonide and PLGA was prepared and completely mixed
before measurement. Sample of 5 mg were sealed in an alu-
minum pan and heated with a scan rate of 10°C/min under a
Fig. 4 DSC thermogram of
budesonide loaded PLGA
nanoparticles, pure budesonide and
mixture of PLGA polymer and
budesonide.
Fig. 5 XRPD spectra of budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles, pure
budesonide, mixture of PLGA polymer and budesonide, pure PLGA polymer
and pure budesonide.
PLGA Nanoparticles for Targeting the Inflamed Intestinal Mucosa
1089

nitrogen supply at a rate of 10 ml/min. The obtained results
were then analyzed using Universal Analysis 2000 software
(Version 4.5a TA Instruments, New Castle, USA). Pure
budesonide shows a clear melting peak, whereas in the com-
bination of PLGA and budesonide (in a physical mixture as
well as in nanoparticles) such peaks cannot be detected.
X-ray Powder Diffraction (XRPD) Measurements
XRPD diffractograms for pure budesonide showed a peak
patterns between 10 and 25°, which corresponds to the crys-
talline state of budesonide. In contrast, no peak was observed
for pure PLGA, which indicates that PLGA is an amorphous
(Fig. 5). For the physical mixture as well as for the nanoparti-
cles, the unique peak patterns of budesonide can be detected.
This, it can be concluded that the drug within the nanoparti-
cles is in crystalline state.
Localization of PLGA Nanoparticles in Murine Gut
Murine colon tissues were used to investigate the localization
of budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles in inflamed and
healthy groups using an In-Vivo Imaging System. Both, the
healthy and the inflamed mice received an equal dose of
budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles by oral gavage with
a final volume of 40 μg/150 μl solution. 18 h after adminis-
tration, the mice were anesthetized and their abdomens were
analyzed with regard to green fluorescence signals from nano-
particles. In this study, it was observed that nanoparticles were
spread in the whole gut in the healthy mice group, whereas in
the inflamed group nanoparticles were more abundant at the
site of inflammation (Fig. 6a). These findings were further
confirmed by a cryo-sectional study of the colon mucosa
(Fig. 6b) for which a confocal laser scanning microscopy was
used. The result showed that the nanoparticles were found in
greater quantities at the site of inflammation in the inflamed
group as compared to the healthy group. Furthermore, the
results were quantified and significantly high fluorescent pos-
itive signals in the inflamed colon were observed (Fig. 6c). To
sum up, the obtained results showed that particles were found
in abundance at the inflammation site and exhibited a statis-
tically significant difference (p <0.001) as compared to the
healthy mice.
DISCUSSION
Nanoparticles have been in use for drug delivery applying
active as well as passive targeting to the site of action and
moreover, nanoparticles have been shown to be a promising
approach for the treatment of IBD (14,24). Therefore, the
primary aim of this study was to formulate a nanocarrier sys-
tem that could deliver the drug to the site of action in the
intestine to minimize the adverse effect and to improve the
therapeutic efficiency. The PLGA nanoparticles presented an
ideal matrix system for incorporation of hydrophobic drugs.
In this study, budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles were
prepared and were fully characterized. Budesonide has a
Fluorescence labeled PLGA NP
Auto-fluorescence bacteria in colon
Negative control
Inflamed
Healthy control
a
b
c
630X%
Healthy control
Inflamed
630X%
Fig. 6 (a) In vivo localization of
nanoparticles in the colon of healthy
control and inflamed control group.
The negative control received no
treatment. The green fluorescent
dye is due to the FITC labeled plain
PLGA nanoparticles. The yellow
color is caused by auto-fluorescence
by intestinal bacteria. (b) Cryo-
sections of colon tissue from both
groups were stained with DAPI as
core dye. Green fluorescent signals
can be identified as nanoparticles in
the tissue and more positive spots
are located in tissue from inflamed
mice. (c) Green positive signals were
quantified in HPF (high power field)
by microscopy and statistically
analyzed. The values are reported
as mean ± SD (***) p < 0.001
indicated significant differences from
healthy control group.
1090
Ali et al.

strong affinity for glucocorticoid receptors. This substance,
however, faces an extensive metabolism by cytochrome
P450 enzyme in the liver (25), thus a limited amount of the
drug reaches the systemic circulation, which is not sufficient
for the required therapeutic effect. Therefore, a carrier system
that should deliver the drug to the site of action was needed. In
this study, the prepared nanoparticles exhibited a smooth and
spherical surface with a size range of 200±05 nm approxi-
mately. The production yield was around 94% that illustrates
that the selected formulation method was appropriate for the
production of budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles. More-
over, The PLGA polymer provided an efficient carrier system
for the delivery of hydrophobic drugs, as it has already been
reported in the literature (26).
The drug release from this formulation showed a biphasic
release profile with an initial burst release followed by slow
and continuous release (Fig. 3). This initial burst release might
be due to drug molecules, which are not completely encapsu-
lated in the polymer core but loosely attached to the surface of
nanoparticles, thus being more accessible to the release medi-
um these drug molecules rapidly released. After the initial
burst release, the drug release profile showed a slow and
sustained drug release profile and approximately 58% drug
release was achieved after 72 h. This slow drug release was
due to the diffusion of drug molecules across the polymer
matrix.
Generally, the solid-state characterization with DSC
(Fig. 4) and XRPD (Fig. 5) was carried out to deter-
mine whether the incorporated
drug
in the
nanoparticulate system appears in crystalline, amor-
phous, or bound form. The DSC thermograms for pure
budesonide, budesonide loaded PLGA nanoparticles and
the physical mixture of budesonide and PLGA polymer
were recorded and shown in Fig. 4. The DSC analysis
confirms the crystalline character of budesonide that ex-
hibited a characteristic melting endotherm at 260.3°C.
This result was found in a good correlation with the
reported literature data (27,28). In comparison, a phys-
ical mixture of budesonide and PLGA polymer (ratio
1:1 w/w) and the drug-loaded nanoparticles were also
analyzed with DSC and such peaks could not be detect-
ed. As budesonide is soluble in molten PLGA, which is
melting at lower temperature than budesonide, DSC is
not suitable to analyze the physical state (crystalline/
amorphous) of the drug in a mixture with PLGA. To
overcome this analytical issue, XRPD was used to in-
vestigate if budesonide in the nanoparticles is crystalline
or amorphous (Fig. 5). The XRPD diffractogram of the
pure drug showed the full crystalline peak patterns. For
the physical mixture as well as for the nanoparticles, the
unique peak patterns of budesonide can also be detect-
ed, even though due to the lower concentration the
peak intensity is reduced. Thus, it can be concluded
that the drug within the nanoparticles is in crystalline
state.
In a previous study with an experimental colitis model (20),
particles tend to preferentially accumulate in inflamed tissues,
thus avoiding rapid elimination by diarrhea. In this study, the
previously raised results can be confirmed with in-vivo imaging
in (Fig. 6a). After 18 h of the administration of fluorescent
labeled nanoparticles they can be found in higher quantities
at the site of inflammation in the colitogenic group as com-
pared to the healthy control group. This can further support
the hypothesis that small sized particles can accumulate to a
greater extent at the site of inflammation. These findings were
further underlined by confocal fluorescence analysis of colon
sections in (Fig. 6b). Similarly, the statistically analysis showed
significant amount of nanoparticles in the inflamed areas. In
the colon tissue of healthy mice, it was observed that the nano-
particles are dispersed in the whole GI tract; while in inflamed
mice the particles were found to a greater extent at the site of
inflammation. These data highlight the potential of nanopar-
ticles for targeted mucosal drug delivery in the treatment of
IBD.
CONCLUSION
The developed budesonide-loaded PLGA nanoparticles ex-
hibited appropriate particles size and a biphasic release pro-
file, resulting from efficient encapsulation of the active by the
polymer in crystalline form. Accumulation of such particles at
the site of inflammation as visualized by in vivo fluorescence
imaging in a relevant mouse model, underscores the potential
of nanoparticles for an improved therapy of IBD. As all ma-
terials and methods are well characterized and safe, such for-
mulation appears mature enough for some subsequent clinical
trial in IBD patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND DISCLOSURES
Dr. Salman Khan is thanked here for his technical assistance.
REFERENCES
1.
Podolsky DK. Inflammatory bowel disease. N Engl J Med.
2002;347(6):417–29.
2.
Head KA, Jurenka JS. Inflammatory bowel disease part 1: ulcera-
tive colitis—pathophysiology and conventional and alternative
treatment options. Altern Med Rev. 2003;8(3):247–83.
3.
Shanahan F. Crohn’s disease. Lancet. 2002;359(9300):62–9.
4.
Gramlich T, Petras RE. Pathology of inflammatory bowel disease.
Semin Pediatr Surg. 2007;16(3):154–63.
5.
Koutroubakis I, Manousos ON, Meuwissen SG, Pena AS.
Environmental risk factors in inflammatory bowel disease.
Hepatogastroenterology. 1996;43(8):381–93.
PLGA Nanoparticles for Targeting the Inflamed Intestinal Mucosa
1091

6.
Nguyen GC, Torres EA, Regueiro M, Bromfield G, Bitton A,
Stempak J, et al. Inflammatory bowel disease characteristics among
African Americans, hispanics, and non-Hispanic Whites: character-
ization of a large north American cohort. Am J Gastroenterol.
2006;101:1012–23.
7.
Fiorino G, Fries W, De La Rue SA, Malesci AC, Repici A, Danese
S. New drug delivery systems in inflammatory bowel disease:
MMX and tailored delivery to the gut. Curr Med Chem.
2010;17(17):1851–7.
8.
Baumgart DC, Sandborn WJ. Inflammatory bowel disease: clinical
aspects and established and evolving therapies. Lancet.
2007;369(9573):1641–57.
9.
Kompella UB, Bandi N, Ayalasomayajula SP. Subconjunctival
nano- and microparticles sustain retinal delivery of budesonide, a
corticosteroid capable of inhibiting VEGF expression. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003;44:192–201.
10.
Greenberg GR, Feagan BG, Martin F, Sutherland LR, Thomson
ABR, et al. Oral budesonide for active Crohns-disease. N Engl J
Med. 1994;331:836–41.
11.
Lofberg R, Rutgeerts P, Malchow H, Lamers C, Danielsson A,
Olaison G, et al. Budesonide prolongs time to relapse in ileal and
ileocaecal Crohn’s disease. A placebo controlled one year study.
Gut. 1996;39:82–6.
12.
Hanauer SB. New steroids for IBD: progress report. Gut. 2002;51:
182–3.
13.
Meissner Y, Lamprecht A. Alternative drug delivery approaches for
the therapy of inflammatory bowel disease. J Pharm Sci.
2008;97(8):2878–91.
14.
Lamprecht A, Ubrich N, Yamamoto H, Schafer U, Takeuchi H,
Maincent P, et al. Biodegradable nanoparticles for targeted drug
delivery in treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther. 2001;299(2):775–81.
15.
Lamprecht A. IBD: selective nanoparticle adhesion can enhance
colitis therapy. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;7(6):311–2.
16.
Nakase H, Okazaki K, Tabata Y, Uose S, Ohana M, Uchida K,
et al. Development of an oral drug delivery system targeting
immune-regulating cells in experimental inflammatory bowel dis-
ease: a new therapeutic strategy. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000;292:
15–21.
17.
Lamprecht A, Yamamoto H, Takeuchi H, Kawashima Y. A pH-
sensitive microsphere system for the colon delivery of tacrolimus
containing nanoparticles. J Control Release. 2005;104(2):337–46.
18.
Lamprecht A, Ubrich N, Yamamoto H, Schafer U, Takeuchi H,
Lehr CM, et al. Design of rolipram-loaded nanoparticles: compar-
ison of two preparation methods. J Control Release. 2001;71(3):
297–306.
19.
Lamprecht A, Yamamoto H, Ubrich N, Takeuchi H,
Maincent P, Kawashima Y. FK506 microparticles mitigate
experimental colitis with minor renal calcineurin suppres-
sion. Pharm Res. 2005;22(2):193–9.
20.
Ali H, Weigmann B, Neurath MF, Collnot EM, Windbergs M,
Lehr C-M. Budesonide loaded nanoparticles with pH-sensitive
coating for improved mucosal targeting in mouse models of inflam-
matory bowel diseases. J Control Release [Internet]. June 10, 2014
[cited April 7, 2015];183:167–77. Retrieved from: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168365914001849.
21.
Weiss B, Schaefer UF, Zapp J, Lamprecht A, Stallmach A, Lehr C-
M. Nanoparticles made of fluorescence-labelled Poly(L-lactide-co-
glycolide): preparation, stability, and biocompatibility. J Nanosci
Nanotechnol. 2006;6(9–10):3048–56.
22.
Leroux JC, Allemann E, Doelker E, Gurny R. New approach for
the preparation of nanoparticles by an emulsification-diffusion
method. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 1995;41:14–8.
23.
Wirtz S, Neufert C, Weigmann B, Neurath MF. Chemically in-
duced mouse models of intestinal inflammation. Nat Protoc.
2007;2:541–6.
24.
Lamprecht A, Schafer U, Lehr CM. Size-dependent bioadhesion of
micro- and nanoparticulate carriers to the inflamed colonic muco-
sa. Pharm Res. 2001;18(6):788–93.
25.
Jonsson G, Astrom A, Andersson P. Budesonide is metabolized by
cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) enzymes in human liver. Drug
Metab Dispos. 1995;23:137–42.
26.
Sahana DK, Mittal G, Bhardwaj V, Kumar M. PLGA nanoparti-
cles for oral delivery of hydrophobic drugs: influence of organic
solvent on nanoparticle formation and release behavior in vitro
and in vivo using estradiol as a model drug. J Pharm Sci. 2008;57:
1530–42.
27.
Tajber L, Corrigan DO, Corrigan OI, Healy AM. Spray drying of
budesonide, formoterol fumarate and their composites—I.
Physicochemical characterisation. Int J Pharm [Internet].
February 9, 2009 [cited May 5, 2015];367(1–2):79–85. Retrieved
from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0378517308006613.
28.
Velaga SP, Berger R, Carlfors J. Supercritical fluids crystallization
of budesonide and flunisolide. Pharm Res. 2002;19(10):1564–71.
1092
Ali et al.