Javascript is currently disabled in your browser. Several features of
this site will not function whilst javascript is disabled.
•  Journals
•  Why Publish With Us?
•  Editorial Policies
•  Author Guidelines
•  Peer Review Guidelines
•  Open Outlook
•  Hot topics
•  Podcasts
•  Reprints
•  Submit New Manuscript
[image] Menu
•  About
•  Contact
•  Sustainability
•  Press Center
•  Testimonials
•  Favored Author Program
•  Permissions
•  Pre-Submission
•  Reprints
•  Login
•  [image]
[image]
Advanced search
Open access to scientific and medical
research
•  Journals
•  Why publish with us?

•  Editorial Policies
•  Author Information
•  Peer Review Guidelines
•  Open Outlook
•  Hot topics
•  Podcasts
 Live Support Chat
106632
Papers Published
Submit new manuscript
Login to view existing manuscript status
Sign up for journal alerts
About Dove Press
Open access peer-reviewed scientific and medical journals.
Learn more
Open Access
[image]
Dove Medical Press is a member of the OAI.
Learn more
Reprints
Bulk reprints for the pharmaceutical industry.
Learn more
Favored Authors
We offer real benefits to our authors, including fast-track processing

of papers.
Learn more
Social Media
     
Back to Journals » Drug Design, Development and Therapy »
Volume 19
Listen
Original Research
Mannosamine-Engineered
Nanoparticles for Precision
Rifapentine Delivery to
Macrophages: Advancing
Targeted Therapy Against
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis
       
       
•  Fulltext
•  Metrics
•  Get Permission
•  Cite this article
Authors Luan H, Peng C, Yasin P, Shang Q, Xiang W, Song X
Received 25 November 2024
Accepted for publication 6 March 2025

Published 19 March 2025 Volume 2025:19 Pages 2081—2102
DOI https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S505682
Checked for plagiarism Yes
Review by Single anonymous peer review
Peer reviewer comments 2
Editor who approved publication: Professor Frank Boeckler
Download Article [PDF] 
Haopeng Luan,* Cong Peng,* Parhat Yasin, Qisong Shang, Wei
Xiang, Xinghua Song
Department of Spine Surgery, the Sixth Affiliated Hospital of
Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, 830002, People’s
Republic of China
*These authors contributed equally to this work
Correspondence: Xinghua Song, Tel +86 13199836661, Email
[email protected]
Background: Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb), remains one of the leading causes of death among infectious
diseases. Enhancing the ability of anti-tuberculosis drugs to
eradicate Mycobacterium tuberculosis within host cells remains a
significant challenge.
Methods: A mannosamine-modified nanoparticle delivery system
was developed using poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
copolymers to enhance the targeted delivery of rifapentine (RPT) to
macrophages. D-mannosamine was conjugated to PLGA-
polyethylene glycol (PLGA-PEG) copolymers through EDC/NHS
coupling chemistry, and the resultant RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG
nanoparticles (NPs) were prepared through a combination of
phacoemulsification and solvent evaporation methods. The

physicochemical properties, toxicity, in vitro drug release profiles,
stability, cellular uptake, and anti-TB efficacy of the NPs were
systematically evaluated.
Results: The RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs had a mean particle size of
108.2 ± 7.2 nm, with encapsulation efficiency and drug loading
rates of 81.2 ± 6.3% and 13.7 ± 0.7%, respectively. RPT release
from the NPs was sustained for over 60 hours. Notably, the
phagocytic uptake of the MAN-PLGA NPs by macrophages was
significantly higher compared to PLGA-PEG NPs. Both NPs
improved pharmacokinetic parameters without inducing significant
organ toxicity. The minimum inhibitory concentration for the NPs
was 0.047 μg/mL, compared to 0.2 μg/mL for free RPT.
Conclusion: The engineered RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs effectively
enhanced macrophage uptake in vitro and facilitated the
intracellular clearance of Mtb. This nanoparticle-based delivery
system offers a promising approach for improving the precision of
anti-TB therapy, extending drug release, optimizing
pharmacokinetic profiles, augmenting antimicrobial efficacy, and
mitigating drug-related toxicities.
Keywords: anti-tubercular, rifapentine, drug delivery system,
nanoparticles, macrophages
Graphical Abstract:
[image]
Introduction
Tuberculosis (TB) continues to be a major global health challenge.
In 2023, the estimated number of TB cases worldwide was 10.8
million, similar to the previous year, reflecting a modest increase
from 10.1 million cases in 2020. While the global incidence of TB
has decreased by 8.3% since 2015, this progress remains well below
the World Health Organization’s target of a 50% reduction by 2025.
In 2023, approximately 1.25 million people died from TB, a slight
decrease from the 1.4 million deaths recorded in 2020 and 2021.
However, the continued impact of other epidemics during this
period has significantly hindered TB control efforts, contributing to
nearly 500,000 additional deaths. These trends underscore the

urgent need for enhanced prevention and treatment strategies to
achieve global TB elimination goals.1
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a facultative intracellular bacterium
that primarily parasitizes macrophages. When it invades
macrophages, it remains latent in the host through the following
mechanisms: 1) inhibition of phagosome fusion with lysosomes,
phagolysosome maturation, and acidification; 2) inhibition of
macrophage major histocompatibility complex II (MHC II) gene
expression, MHC II molecule maturation, and trafficking; and 3)
inhibition of oxidative stress, apoptosis, autophagy, pyroptosis, and
metal ion limitation mechanisms.2 Therefore, eliminating and
inhibiting the growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis within
macrophages is crucial for ensuring the successful treatment of
tuberculosis.
Currently, first-line anti-tuberculosis drugs are predominantly used
in clinical practice. While these drugs effectively kill
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, there are still limitations in traditional
first-line oral treatments, which include: 1) the requirement for
multi-drug combination therapy, prolonged treatment duration, and
increased drug resistance; 2) some antibiotics are highly hydrophilic
and have poor cell permeability;3 3) some antibiotics can easily
enter cells, but their intracellular retention time is short; 4) high
first-pass metabolism in the liver associated with traditional drug
delivery; 5) selective permeability of biological barriers, such as the
blood-brain barrier, inhibits the effective delivery of drugs to these
sites; and 6) high-dose administration results in significant toxic
side effects, including neurotoxicity, ocular toxicity, nephrotoxicity,
and ototoxicity, further decreasing patient compliance.4,5 These
challenges have prompted the investigation of an increasing
number of second-line anti-TB drugs and their formulations.
Rifapentine (RPT), a semisynthetic cyclopentamicin antibiotic, has
been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a
first-line anti-TB drug. Its antitubercular mechanism is similar to
that of rifampicin, but RPT’s minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) is only 0.12 mg/L to 0.25 mg/L. Its antitubercular activity is
2 to 10 times greater than rifampicin, and its half-life is 4 to 5 times
longer, allowing for only 1 to 2 doses per week in clinical practice.6

Achieving effective bactericidal concentrations of traditional oral or
injectable anti-TB drugs within macrophages remains challenging.
This often necessitates the use of high-dose, long-term multidrug
combinations to achieve satisfactory therapeutic effects, which
increases the risk of adverse reactions and resistance rates and
results in poor patient adherence.7,8 Active targeting of
macrophage-specific anti-TB drug delivery systems offers a novel
approach to tuberculosis treatment.9 This involves modifying drug
delivery carriers with specific ligands that bind to phagocytic
receptors on macrophages, thereby inducing ligand-receptor
interactions to enhance the phagocytosis of drug-loaded systems by
macrophages and achieve effective bactericidal concentrations
within macrophages.10,11
Numerous studies have demonstrated that nanotechnology can
significantly enhance the therapeutic efficacy of traditional drugs,
attracting widespread attention in the biomedical field.12,13 To
date, various polymeric nanocarriers have been developed and used
for targeted drug delivery.14 With the continuous advancement of
nanotechnology, functional groups responsive to different biological
microenvironments have been incorporated into the design of novel
drug carriers, aiming to improve drug accumulation at disease sites
while reducing side effects. Nanodrug carriers have shown
tremendous potential in cancer treatment, metabolic disease
therapy, and antimicrobial applications.15–17 Tuberculosis, a
chronic infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is
most commonly manifested as pulmonary tuberculosis. Traditional
formulations and administration routes of anti-tuberculosis drugs
struggle to maintain effective drug concentrations at the lesion
sites, while high-dose combination therapy often leads to significant
adverse effects.13,18 Poor patient adherence and irregular
medication further contribute to the emergence of multidrug-
resistant strains. As a result, researchers have been searching for
more effective treatment methods. The rise of medicine and
nanoscience has spurred the development of nanomaterials, and the
application of nanomaterials as drug carriers has provided a new
direction in medical science. Nanotechnology holds considerable
promise in the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of infectious
diseases, including tuberculosis. The main advantages of
nanoparticles as drug carriers include their small size, high stability,

enhanced delivery of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs, as
well as the ability to deliver large molecules into cells.19
Furthermore, they allow for targeted drug delivery to specific cells
or tissues, and offer the feasibility of various administration
routes.20 These carriers also exhibit strong adaptability, ease of
control, and slow, sustained drug release from the carrier systems.21
Polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) is a commonly utilized
biodegradable polymer, primarily due to its biocompatible
metabolites, lactic acid and glycolic acid. These metabolites are
soluble in standard solvents and naturally metabolized by the body
through the tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle. Furthermore, PLGA can
be engineered into diverse shapes and sizes, making it a preferred
carrier for delivering drugs, proteins, and macromolecules (eg,
DNA, RNA and peptides) to study their physicochemical
properties.22,23 The polymer’s properties can be further
‘intelligently regulated’ by adjusting the ratio of lactic acid to
glycolic acid monomers and modifying the physical properties of
PLGA nanocarriers, such as size, shape, surface area, and volume,
allowing for tailored drug release rates.24 Due to its excellent
biocompatibility and adaptability, PLGA has received approval for a
range of biomedical applications and is authorized by the US FDA
for human use, particularly in sustained-release drug delivery
systems.25,26 Additionally, polyethylene glycol (PEG) can further
provide a steric barrier to prolong the circulation time of
nanoparticles (NPs).22,27
The macrophage mannose receptor is a transmembrane protein with
multiple carbohydrate-binding domains, including a cysteine-rich
domain and several C-type lectin domains. These domains can
specifically bind to mannose and other carbohydrate molecules,
facilitating immune recognition, phagocytosis, and
immunomodulation.28 Based on the above research background, the
goal of this study is to synthesize a nanoparticle system capable of
loading anti-tuberculosis drugs and investigate its effect on
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) within macrophages. Currently,
isoniazid and rifampicin are still the first-line drugs for tuberculosis
treatment, and several drug delivery systems for isoniazid or
rifampicin have been reported in the literature.29–31 In this study,
rifapentine was selected as the therapeutic drug in the drug delivery

system for the following reasons: 1. Although rifampicin is a first-
line anti-tuberculosis drug in the rifamycin-class of antibiotics,
around 500,000 new cases of rifampicin-resistant tuberculosis occur
each year,1 which may limit its clinical use. Moreover, the World
Health Organization has expressed concern about the low
bioavailability of the rifampicin/isoniazid combination therapy.32
2. Rifapentine, a derivative of rifamycin, shares a similar structure
and activity with rifampicin. Studies have shown that combination
therapy based on rifapentine can prevent the emergence of
rifampicin-resistant Mtb strains.33 3. More importantly, rifapentine
has several times the activity against Mtb compared to rifampicin,
with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) as low as 0.02–
0.06 μg/mL.34 This characteristic is advantageous for encapsulating
the drug in polymers, reducing the required dosage. Additionally,
PLGA-PEG was chosen as the nanoparticle carrier in this study.
PLGA is one of the most widely used polymers, approved for use in
drug delivery systems in the US and Europe, with excellent
biocompatibility and the ability to degrade in vivo. More
importantly, it provides opportunities for further structural
modifications, especially on the nanoparticle surface, to enhance its
therapeutic performance.35,36 For example, PEG (polyethylene
glycol) is a hydrophilic, inert polymer that, when added to
nanoparticles, improves their hydrophilicity, facilitates escape from
hepatic cell phagocytosis, enhances nanoparticle stability in the
body, reduces premature drug release, and prolongs the circulation
time in vivo, indirectly increasing the “macrophage targeting” drug
quantity in circulation.37,38 Mannosamine, an amino sugar
molecule with an amine group in its structure, can bind efficiently
to the mannose receptors on the surface of macrophages. As a
result, it has wide applications in macrophage-targeted drug
delivery systems.39 The mannosamine molecules conjugated to the
nanoparticle surface enhance the nanoparticles’ affinity for
macrophages. This ligand-receptor interaction is crucial for targeted
drug delivery. Upon binding to the mannose receptor, the receptor-
mediated endocytosis process is activated, and the macrophage
internalizes the nanoparticles, thereby delivering the drug directly
into the cells.40 Because the drug concentration is significantly
increased in the targeted cells, this method can enhance the
therapeutic effect without increasing the drug dose. Therefore, we
have designed and constructed a mannosamine-modified PLGA-PEG

nanoparticle drug delivery system for the targeted delivery of
rifapentine to macrophages, aiming to enhance the intracellular
killing ability against Mtb.
Materials and Methods
Materials
All chemicals and reagents were obtained from Sigma (USA), unless
otherwise specified. Rifapentine (RPT, purity: 98%) was purchased
from Solarbio Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). PLGA-PEG
(Mw: 3000)-COOH (Mw: 19,000; lactide ratio: 50:50) was procured
from Xi’an Ruixi Biological Technology Co., Ltd. (Shaanxi, China).
D-mannosamine was purchased from Merck (USA). Dialysis bags
(MWCO: 8000–14,000) were purchased from Shanghai Yuanye
Biological Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM), trypsin-EDTA, fetal bovine
serum (FBS), and penicillin-streptomycin solution were obtained
from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). BCG and
H37Rv were acquired from ATCC (USA). The Cell Counting Kit-8
(CCK-8) was sourced from AbMole (USA), and the 7H9 medium and
OADC supplement were obtained from BD (USA). The RAW264.7
cell line was purchased from Pricella Biotechnology Co., Ltd.
(Wuhan, China).
Animals
Male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats, weighing 180g to 220 g, were used
in this study. The rats were housed five per cage under controlled
environmental conditions, with room temperature maintained at 25
°C ± 2 °C, humidity at 50% ± 5%, and a 12-hour light/dark cycle.
Food and water were provided ad libitum to maintain the rats in a
stable physiological state throughout the experimental period.
Preparation of RPT-Loaded NPs
Fifty milligrams of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-polyethylene glycol-
carboxyl (PLGA-PEG-COOH) was weighed and transferred into a 50
mL beaker, followed by the addition of 20 mL of dimethyl sulfoxide

(DMSO). Once fully dissolved, 50 mg of 1-Ethyl-3-(3-
dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and 60 mg
of N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) were weighed and added.41
Ultrasonication was carried out using an ultrasonic cleaner. The
solution was incubated on a shaker at 37°C for 30 minutes.
Subsequently, 10 mg of D-mannosamine was added, and the
mixture was placed on a shaker.42 After 24 hours of reaction, the
solution was transferred into a dialysis bag. The dialysis bag was
placed in a beaker containing pure water, and the magnetic stirrer
was activated. After 72 hours of dialysis in pure water, the sample
was centrifuged at 4500 rpm. The dialysate was dispensed into a 10
mL white glass bottle and freeze-dried for future use.
Seventy milligrams of D-mannosamine-modified PLGA-PEG (MAN-
PLGA-PEG) and 10 mg of rifapentine were dissolved ultrasonically
in 2 mL of dichloromethane solution, after which the resulting
suspension was added to 15 mL of 0.5% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)
aqueous solution and sonicated in an ice bath (sonication time of
2 seconds at 3-second intervals and 90 W power for 80 cycles). The
suspension was transferred into a 50 mL three-necked flask and
mechanically stirred at 400 rpm for 4 hours at room temperature to
completely volatilize the dichloromethane. Excess MAN-PLGA-PEG,
PVA, and other impurities were removed by washing the
nanomaterial three times using ultrafiltration tube centrifugation
with a pore size of 10 kDa. The centrifugation was performed at a
speed of 4000 rpm to ensure efficient removal of impurities. The
nanoparticle was collected, yielding rifapentine-loaded MAN-PLGA-
PEG nanoparticles (RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs). For coumarin 6-
labeled nanoparticles used in phagocytic studies, coumarin 6 was
added to the dichloromethane, which was the only modification to
the procedure described above.
Physicochemical Characterization
The particle size and polydispersity index (PDI) were measured
using dynamic light scattering (DLS), while zeta potential was
determined by assessing electrophoretic mobility. Each sample was
diluted in purified water at 25°C. Measurements were conducted in
triplicate using a ZetaSizer Nano-ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd.,
Malvern, UK). The product was further analyzed using Fourier

transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Shimadzu, Japan). The
spectra of D-mannosamine, PLGA-PEG, and MAN-PLGA-PEG were
recorded between wavelengths range of 500 and 4,000 cm−1.
Additionally, the conjugates were further characterized using 1H
NMR spectroscopy on a Bruker spectrometer, and the morphology
was observed by transmission electron Microscopy (TEM, HT-7800,
Hitachi, Ltd., Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
analysis was performed using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer
(ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).
Thermogravimetry Analysis
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted using a TGA,
Q600 (TA Instruments, USA) in ramp mode, with a temperature
range from 30°C to 600°C at a heating rate of 10°C/min under a
nitrogen atmosphere.43
Determination of Drug Entrapment Efficiency (EE%)
and Drug Loading (DL%)
To determine the drug entrapment efficiency and drug loading, 1
mg of nanoparticles was accurately weighed into a glass test tube,
and 1 mL of dichloromethane was added. This was mixed
thoroughly and sonicated at 500 W for 10 minutes. The
dichloromethane was evaporated under a nitrogen stream at room
temperature until completely volatilized. The residue was
reconstituted to a final volume of 2 mL with high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade methanol. The resulting
solution was filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane filter and
transferred into an HPLC sample vial. HPLC analysis was conducted
using a C18 column (4.6 × 150 mm, 5 μm, Elite, Dalian, China) at
a column temperature of 30°C, with a detection wavelength of 335
nm, a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min, and an injection volume of 10 μL.
The drug content in the nanoparticles was quantified by analyzing
the peak area under the specified chromatographic conditions and
applying the results to a standard curve equation. The drug loading
(DL%) and encapsulation efficiency (EE%) of the nanoparticles were
subsequently calculated using the established equations (Eq1 and
Eq2).

(1)[image]
(2)[image]
Stability Tests
Freshly prepared freeze-dried NPs were stored in a stability
chamber at 25°C for 3 months. At the same time, we freeze-dried
the prepared nanomaterial and reconstituted it using medium.
Samples were periodically collected to measure particle size,
polydispersity index (PDI), and encapsulation efficiency (EE%). The
overall stability was assessed by comparing particle size, PDI, and
EE% to the initial encapsulated RPT values. Each analysis was
performed in triplicate.
Drug Release Studies
Free RPT, RPT-PLGA-PEG, and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles
were placed in dialysis bags (MWCO: 8000–14,000) and immersed
in 50 mL centrifuge tubes containing 40 mL of PBS buffer (pH 4.5
or 7.4) supplemented with 0.2% Tween-80. The tubes were
incubated in a thermostatic shaking water bath at 37°C with a
rotation speed of 100 rpm. At predetermined intervals, 1 mL of
solution was withdrawn and replaced with an equal volume of PBS
buffer at the same pH. The RPT concentration in different samples
was determined using HPLC under the specified conditions.
Cumulative drug release profiles were plotted over time and fitted
to various drug release kinetic models.
In vitro Cytotoxicity Assay
RAW264.7 murine macrophages were seeded into 96-well plates at
a density of 2×104 cells per well. After 24 hours, drug solutions at
different concentrations were added to the wells, followed by an
additional 24-hour incubation. The final RPT concentrations were
set at 0, 5, 10, 25, and 50 μg/mL. Subsequently, 10 μL of CCK-8
reagent was added to each well and incubated at 37 °C in the dark
for 2 hours. The optical density (OD) at 450 nm was then measured

using a microplate reader. To assess the cytotoxicity of the blank
NPs, the same protocol was followed. RAW264.7 cells were treated
with blank NPs at various concentrations (0 mg/mL to 1.2 mg/mL).
Twelve replicate wells were prepared for each concentration, and
PBS buffer was added to the outermost wells of the plate to
minimize edge effects.
Cellular Uptake
Flow cytometry was employed to evaluate the uptake of RPT-MAN-
PLGA-PEG nanoparticles by RAW264.7 murine macrophages. Log-
phase RAW264.7 cells were diluted to a concentration of 1×106
cells/mL and seeded into six-well plates. The cells were treated with
Coumarin-6 fluorescently labeled PLGA-PEG, MAN-PLGA-PEG, RPT-
PLGA-PEG, and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs for 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24
hours.44 Untreated RAW264.7 cells served as the negative control
group. After incubation, the cells were gently washed with PBS to
remove nanoparticles adhering to the cell membrane and not
internalized. The cells were then collected, centrifuged at 1000 rpm
for 5 minutes, and resuspended in PBS. In a parallel experiment,
0.05 M D-mannosamine was added to assess the effect of mannose
receptor inhibition on the uptake of MAN-PLGA-PEG and RPT-
MAN-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles by macrophages. All other steps were
performed as described above. Data analysis was performed using
FlowJo version 10 (FlowJo LLC, Ashland, OR, USA).
For confocal imaging, RAW264.7 cells were seeded into laser
confocal dishes at a density of 5×104 cells/mL and cultured for
24 hours to ensure uniform cell density across groups. Coumarin-6-
labeled PLGA-PEG NPs and MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs were suspended in
the culture medium and added to the dishes, with untreated cells
serving as a negative control. After co-incubation for 6 hours, the
cells were washed three times with PBS to remove residual NPs
adhering to the cell membrane. The cells were then fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde and stained with 5 μg/mL DAPI for 15 minutes
to visualize the nuclear morphology. Images were captured using a
confocal laser scanning microscope (Leica, Germany), where
coumarin-6 and DAPI emitted green and blue fluorescence,
respectively.

Haemolytic Toxicity
The hemolysis rate was used to evaluate the compatibility of NPs
with red blood cells. Blood samples were collected from SD rats and
centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 20 minutes to separate the red blood
cells, which were subsequently resuspended in 0.9% w/v saline.
NPs at varying concentrations (0.5, 1.5 and 3.5 mg/mL) were
prepared in normal saline and incubated with the red blood cell
suspension.41 The collected red blood cell suspensions were first
subjected to a full-spectrum UV spectrophotometric scan across the
wavelength range of 200–800 nm to identify and record the
absorption peaks. Based on the measurements, wavelengths of
541.5 nm and 576.5 nm were selected. Additionally, 545 nm,45 a
wavelength commonly cited in the literature, was included in our
analysis to enhance the robustness of the results. Distilled water
was used as the positive control. Absorbance was measured at 541.5
nm, 545 nm, and 576.5 nm using a UV-visible spectrophotometer.
The hemolytic rate of each sample was calculated using the
formula: Haemolytic rate (%) = [(Absorbance of sample −
Absorbance of saline)/(Absorbance of water − Absorbance of
saline)] × 100.
In vitro Anti-Tubercular Studies
The antimycobacterial activity of NPs against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis was evaluated using a microplate Alamar Blue assay
following a previously established protocol.45,46 The
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv strain was cultured in modified
Löwenstein-Jensen medium and incubated at 37°C for 2–3 weeks.
To prepare the bacterial suspension, 1–2 drops of 5% Tween-80
were added to a sterile grinding bottle. Fresh bacterial colonies
were carefully scraped from the culture medium using a sterile
inoculation loop and transferred into the bottle. The suspension was
then vortexed for 20 seconds and allowed to settle. Following this,
2 mL of physiological saline was added, thoroughly mixed, and
allowed to settle again. The supernatant was carefully collected
using a sterile pipette and adjusted to a turbidity equivalent to 1
McFarland standard. Finally, dilute the bacterial suspension with
7H9 liquid medium supplemented with OADC to prepare for
subsequent experiments. First, 200 μL of sterile deionized water was

added to the outer peripheral wells to prevent evaporation. Next,
100 μL of either free rifapentine or rifapentine-loaded nanoparticle
formulations was added to each well. Serial 1:2 dilutions were then
performed in columns 3 through 10. The final concentration range
for free RPT was set between 1.6 μg/mL and 0.006 μg/mL and
between 0.75 μg/mL and 0.003 μg/mL for drug-loaded NPs. Finally,
100 μL of the previously diluted Mycobacterium tuberculosis
inoculum was added to wells in columns 2 through 11. Column 11
served as the positive control without drug. After 7 days of
incubation, 50 μL of Alamar Blue reagent was added, followed by
re-incubation for an additional 24 hours. The results were analyzed
based on color changes in each well. The concentration
corresponding to no observable bacterial growth was recorded as
the minimum inhibitory concentration of the formulation.
Intracellular Inhibition of Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis by NPs
The colony-forming unit(CFU)assay was used to evaluate the
bactericidal effects of nanoparticles on Mycobacterium
tuberculosis(MTB)in RAW264.7 cells infected with MTB. Free drugs
at a concentration of 0.047 μg/mL and nanoparticles containing an
equivalent drug concentration were used for the intervention.
RAW264.7 cells were seeded at a density of 1×106 cells per well in
12-well plates and infected with BCG at a MOI of 1 for 24 hours or
H37Rv at a MOI of 1 for 4 hours. The cells were then incubated
with the drugs or nanoparticles for 72 hours. After incubation, the
cells were washed three times with PBS, lysed with PBS containing
0.03% SDS for 10 minutes to release intracellular MTB, and the
lysates were collected. Each group included three replicates. The
lysates were serially diluted in 7H9 medium, plated on Middlebrook
7H11 plates, and incubated at 37°C for 21 days to quantify CFUs.
Pharmacokinetics Study
This animal experiment was approved by the Animal Ethics
Committee of Xinjiang Medical University (Approval No.
20240711–18). The study was conducted in accordance with the
principles and guidelines approved by the committee, as well as the
NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Eighth

Edition) and internationally recognized guidelines.47 Male Sprague-
Dawley (SD) rats weighing 180g to 220g were randomly divided
into three groups: free rifapentine, RPT-PLGA-PEG, and RPT-MAN-
PLGA-PEG nanoparticles. SD rats were intraperitoneally injected
with 2% sodium pentobarbital (3mg/100g) for anesthesia. Each rat
received a single intravenous injection of the drug or nanoparticles
with equal drug content (10 mg/kg) at the same time. Blood
samples were collected from the rats at predetermined time points
via orbital bleeding. Proteins were separated from plasma using
acetonitrile, and supernatants were collected by centrifugation.48
The concentration of RPT in plasma was measured using HPLC. The
maximum concentration (Cmax), time to reach maximum plasma
concentration (Tmax), half-life (t1/2), mean residence time (MRT),
and area under the curve (AUC0–∞) were evaluated.
Tissue Distribution Studies
In a single-dose rifapentine disposition study, mice in each group
received a single intravenous dose of 10 mg/kg rifapentine. The
mice were divided into four groups: control (normal saline),
rifapentine, RPT-PLGA-PEG NPs, and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs. The
animals were sacrificed at specified time intervals. After plasma
collection, tissues (liver, kidneys, and lungs) were excised, quickly
washed with normal saline, and stored at −80°C. Drug
concentrations were estimated in 20% (w/v) tissue homogenates.
Rifapentine content was measured using the HPLC method as
described previously. The results were expressed as μg/g
(microgram per gram of tissue).
To evaluate the potential toxicity of NPs in different organs,
animals were euthanized on the fourth day after injection. The
heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, and spleen were excised and
immediately rinsed with saline to remove residual blood. The
organs were then immersed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution in
centrifuge tubes for 72 hours for tissue fixation. Fixed tissues were
embedded in paraffin and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) to assess any pathological changes in the organs.
Biochemical analyses were performed on collected blood samples to
evaluate potential hepatic and renal function impairments through
standard biochemical tests.

Statistical Analysis
All experiments were conducted in triplicate, with each experiment
repeated at least three times. Results are expressed as the mean ±
standard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses were conducted using
SPSS version 17.0 software. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test was used for group comparisons.
A P-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results and Discussion
Physicochemical Characterization
The 1H NMR spectra of D-mannosamine, PLGA-PEG-COOH, and
MAN-PLGA-PEG were analyzed, as displayed in Figure 1A. In the
1H NMR spectrum of PLGA-PEG-COOH, the peak at 8.13 ppm
represents the characteristic signal of the -OH group in the
carboxylic acid. Peaks at 1.48 ppm and 5.21 ppm correspond to the
characteristic signals of the methyl and methine groups of the
glycolic acid (GA) segment, respectively, while the peak at 4.91
ppm corresponds to the methylene group of the lactic acid (LA)
segment. In the 1H NMR spectrum of D-mannosamine, peaks at 5.24
and 5.05 ppm correspond to terminal hydrogen atoms, while peaks
between 3.54 and 3.41 ppm correspond to methylene protons, and
those between 4.05 and 3.77 ppm correspond to methine protons.
In the 1H NMR spectrum of MAN-PLGA-PEG, Peaks at 1.48 and
5.20 ppm represent the methyl and methine groups of the glycolic
acid (GA) segment, while the peak at 4.91 ppm corresponds to the
methylene group of the lactic acid (LA) segment, all of which
belong to the PLGA chain. The peak at 3.51 ppm is assigned to the
methylene group of the PEG segment. The integration ratio of the
characteristic peaks of the PEG and PLGA chains suggests an
approximate molar ratio of 1:1 between PEG and PLGA. A
comparison of the 1H NMR spectra of D-mannosamine, PLGA-PEG-
COOH, and MAN-PLGA-PEG reveals a distinct peak at 7.5 ppm in
the MAN-PLGA-PEG spectrum, which is attributed to the formation
of an amide bond, thereby confirming the successful conjugation of
D-mannosamine to PLGA-PEG-COOH.

[image]
Figure 1 Physicochemical characterization of the
nanomaterials. (A) Proton nuclear magnetic resonance
(¹H NMR) spectra. (B) Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectra of D-mannosamine, PLGA-PEG-COOH, and MAN-
PLGA-PEG. (C) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
results of the same materials, with 1 representing D-
mannosamine, 2 representing PLGA-PEG-COOH, and 3
representing MAN-PLGA-PEG and (D) thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) of the three materials.
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was conducted on
MAN-PLGA-PEG to confirm the conjugation of D-mannosamine onto
the surface of PLGA-PEG, and the results are presented in the Figure
1B. The absorption bands in the 3300cm⁻¹ to 2800 cm⁻¹ region
correspond to the stretching vibrations of C-H bonds. Absorption at
wavelengths above 3000 cm⁻¹ corresponds to the stretching
vibrations of unsaturated C-H bonds, whereas absorption below
3000 cm⁻¹ generally corresponds to the stretching vibrations of
saturated C-H bonds. The absorption bands around 2960cm⁻¹ to
2850 cm⁻¹ are typically associated with the stretching vibrations of
methyl, methylene, and methine groups in alkanes.39 The
absorption band near 1750 cm⁻¹ represents the characteristic peak
of carbonyl (C=O) functional groups, which are formed by a
double bond between carbon and oxygen. The absorption band
around 1650 cm⁻¹ corresponds to the amide I band, primarily
attributed to C=O stretching vibrations, representing the strongest
absorption peak of the amide bond. The absorption bands between
1450cm⁻¹ to 1300 cm⁻¹ are mainly associated with the stretching
vibrations of saturated hydrocarbon C-H bonds, whereas the
absorption band near 1290 cm⁻¹ corresponds to the amide III band,
primarily due to C-N stretching vibrations. The absorption region
between 1000cm⁻¹ to 1250 cm⁻¹ is primarily attributed to the
stretching vibrations of C-O and C-O-C bonds. In summary, the FTIR
spectrum of MAN-PLGA-PEG showed prominent stretching vibration
peaks for C=O and C-O bonds, along with characteristic absorption
peaks for amides, particularly the amide I and amide III bands.
These spectral features confirm that the amide bond formation

between the activated carboxyl groups of PLGA-PEG and the amino
groups of D-mannosamine had occurred, thereby validating the
successful conjugation of D-mannosamine onto PLGA-PEG.
To elucidate the internal composition of the three materials and
confirm that D-mannosamine and PLGA-PEG-COOH undergo
dehydration condensation reactions to form amide bonds, X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted. Figure 1C
presents the high-resolution C 1s spectra of D-mannosamine, PLGA-
PEG-COOH, and MAN-PLGA-PEG. The three peaks in the D-
mannosamine spectrum correspond to C-C, C-NH2, and C-O bonds,
respectively, while the PLGA-PEG-COOH spectrum exhibits a peak
around 288 eV, indicating aldehyde groups. Notably, C-N and C-O
bonds are observed in MAN-PLGA-PEG, with shifts to higher
binding energies compared to mannosamine and PLGA-PEG-COOH,
attributed to changes in the bonding environment after the
polymerization of -NH2 in mannosamine and -OH in PLGA-PEG-
COOH, leading to increased binding energy. Additionally, the peak
at 288.4 eV is attributed to a complex peak representing both the
amide bond and aldehyde group, which results in a shift from the
original aldehyde peak at 288 eV. In the high-resolution N 1s
spectra, the only significant peak in D-mannosamine corresponds to
C-N bonding, while no nitrogen was detected in PLGA-PEG-COOH,
consistent with its internal structural composition. The N 1s
spectrum of MAN-PLGA-PEG displayed a significant decrease in the
C-N bonding ratio at 399.7 eV, along with the appearance of a new
peak at 401 eV corresponding to N-C=O, further confirming that D-
mannosamine and PLGA-PEG-COOH underwent dehydration
condensation to form MAN-PLGA-PEG. In MAN-PLGA-PEG,
compared to PLGA-PEG-COOH, the C-O bonding ratio (66.2) was
higher than in PLGA-PEG-COOH (57.6). This increase is attributed
to the polymerization of D-mannosamine during the conjugation
process, which is consistent with the formation of the amide bond
between D-mannosamine and PLGA-PEG-COOH, providing further
evidence of the successful conjugation.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted for D-
mannosamine, PLGA-PEG-COOH, and MAN-PLGA-PEG over a
temperature range of 30 °C to 600°C, as shown in Figure 1D. D-
mannosamine exhibited two stages of mass loss. In the first stage, a

7.58% w/w weight loss between 30 °C and 123.18 °C was attributed
to the desorption of adsorbed and bound water, a typical behavior
for hydrophilic compounds. In the second weight loss stage, a more
notable mass loss of 55.63% w/w was observed between 265.88 °C
and 450.83 °C. This weight loss was associated with the
decomposition of D-mannosamine, likely involving the breakdown
of its organic structure under thermal conditions. The PLGA-PEG-
COOH and MAN-PLGA-PEG copolymers displayed a single stage of
mass loss around 230.87 °C and 238.38 °C, respectively.
Furthermore, the incorporation of D-mannosamine into the PLGA-
PEG-COOH matrix enhanced the thermal stability of MAN-PLGA-
PEG compared to the unmodified PLGA-PEG-COOH. This
improvement in thermal stability is likely due to the formation of
strong amide bonds between the D-mannosamine and PLGA-PEG-
COOH, which contribute to a more robust polymer structure that is
more resistant to thermal degradation.43,49,50
Particle size plays a critical role in determining the specific
physicochemical properties of NPs; thus, accurate measurement of
particle size is essential for drug delivery systems.51,52 The size of
NPs significantly influences their biodistribution, cellular uptake,
and clearance from the body. Typically, NPs with sizes below 10
nm are cleared through the kidneys via renal filtration,53,54 while
those above 200 nm tend to have faster plasma clearance rates.55 In
this study, the RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs had an average size of
108.2 ± 7.2 nm (Table 1 and Figure 2A), which is considered
suitable for long-term sustained-release delivery. Liu et al56
reported that NPs of this size can be efficiently phagocytosed by
cells and are also large enough to be retained in systemic
circulation for extended periods. Ideally, the modification with D-
mannosamine should result in significant differences in particle
size. However, the absence of significant differences suggests that
certain factors may have influenced the outcome. Possible reasons
for this lack of difference include: 1) The two types of nanoparticles
may possess similar physicochemical properties, such as surface
charge, hydrophilicity, and hydrophobicity, which partially
determine their stability and particle size. Due to the characteristics
of PLGA (polylactic-co-glycolic acid) and PEG (polyethylene glycol),
the overall particle size of nanoparticles may be more significantly
influenced by these materials, while the effect of D-mannosamine

modification is relatively minor. These properties may thus obscure
any influence of D-mannosamine on particle size; 2) Specific
modifications to nanodrug delivery systems, such as surface ligand
functionalization, are typically designed to enhance targeting
efficiency or improve cellular uptake rather than significantly alter
particle size. D-mannosamine modification primarily aims to target
specific receptors, such as mannose receptors on the surface of
macrophages; therefore, it is more likely to affect the targeting
capability and cellular uptake of nanoparticles rather than their
particle size; 3) Interactions between D-mannosamine, PLGA, and
PEG may reduce the potential influence of D-mannosamine on
particle size. The presence of PLGA and PEG may partially mask or
counteract the impact of D-mannosamine on particle size, thereby
maintaining a relatively stable particle size. Therefore, further
investigation and exploration of these factors are necessary to better
understand the lack of significant differences in particle size.
[image]
Table 1 Physicochemical Characterization of Rifapentine
Loaded NPs
[image]
Figure 2 Morphological characterization of the
nanomaterials. (A) Particle size distribution. (B) Zeta
potential measurement. (C) Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) image of the nanomaterials, scale bar:
100 nm. (D) Nanomaterials in liquid state. (E)
Nanomaterials after lyophilization.
Positively charged nanoformulations exhibit higher plasma
clearance rates compared to their neutral and negatively charged
counterparts. Furthermore, the presence of negatively charged
serum proteins may promote aggregation following the
administration of positively charged nanoparticles, potentially
resulting in capillary embolization.57,58 Moreover, a highly
negative surface charge indicates strong electrostatic repulsion
between nanoparticles, serving as a critical indicator of stability.45

Haggag et al59 reported that PLGA nanoparticles (NPs) exhibited a
negative zeta potential, which was significantly greater than that of
PEGylated PLGA nanoparticles. In our study, all four types of
nanoparticles exhibited negative zeta potentials, The zeta potentials
of PLGA-PEG, MAN-PLGA-PEG, RPT-PLGA-PEG and RPT-MAN-
PLGA-PEG nanoparticles were −19.89 ± 0.31, −16.37 ± 0.43,
−20.54 ± 0.84 and −15.35 ± 0.77, respectively (Table 1 and
Figure 2B), primarily attributed to the presence of carboxyl groups
at the termini of the PLGA chains. The slight decrease in the zeta
potential of MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs may be attributed to D-
mannosamine, which contains both an amino group (-NH2) and a
hydroxyl group (-OH). In neutral or mildly basic environments, the
amino group may become partially protonated (positively charged),
resulting in a neutralizing effect on the overall surface potential.
However, the concentration of D-mannosamine is insufficient to
fully neutralize the negative charge on the PLGA-PEG surface.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed that all four
types of nanoparticles were uniformly dispersed as individual
particles with smooth, spherical surfaces. No significant alterations
were detected on the surface or within the internal structure of the
nanoparticles. High-magnification imaging revealed a core-shell
structure, with the core encapsulated by an outer layer, indicating
that the drug was embedded within the polymer matrix60,61 (Figure
2C). The polydispersity coefficients (PDI) of the four nanomaterials
were less than 0.2, and the PDI of the four nanomaterials PLGA-
PEG, MAN-PLGA-PEG, RPT-PLGA-PEG and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG
were 0.184 ± 0.016, 0.178 ± 0.029, 0.172 ± 0.018, and 0.190 ±
0.015, respectively, suggesting that the nanoparticles had uniform
size, and were less prone to large particles or aggregates, with high
kinetic stability (Table 1). Moreover, stability studies indicated no
significant variations in particle size, PDI, or encapsulation
efficiency, suggesting that both nanoparticle types maintained
stability for at least 3 months (Table 2). Figure 2D and E illustrate
the morphology of the nanoparticles in their liquid state and after
lyophilization, respectively. The liquid formulations of the two
drug-loaded NPs appeared brick-red, indicating the presence of the
drug (likely due to the color of the rifapentine). These formulations
exhibited good fluidity and were free from particles or precipitates,
with a smooth texture, suggesting the absence of aggregation or

instability in the formulation. To further investigate the effect of
RPT on PLGA-PEG NPs, the same preparation method and batch
were used to produce non-drug-loaded PLGA-PEG and MAN-PLGA-
PEG NPs. The liquid formulations of both these non-drug-loaded
NPs appeared milky white, smooth in texture, free of particles or
precipitates, and formed a semi-transparent liquid. All four
lyophilized nanoparticle formulations were characterized by a loose
powder form, with no clumping, particle adhesion, or static
adsorption, and demonstrated stable physical properties, further
confirming the stability of the NPs. For freeze-dried nanomaterials,
no significant changes in physicochemical properties were observed
after reconstitution with culture medium (Table 3).
[image]
Table 2 Stability Evaluation Within Three Months
[image]
Table 3 Physicochemical Characterization of Four
Nanomaterials After Freeze Drying and Reconstitution
Currently, various nanocarriers loaded with anti-tuberculosis (anti-
TB) drugs have been reported, including liposomes, polymeric
micelles, and exosomes.32 However, research on RPT
nanoformulations remains limited. Recently, Magalhães et al62
reported RPT-loaded lipid nanoparticles with a particle size of 242
nm, a polydispersity index (PDI) of 0.17, a zeta potential (ZP) of
−22 mV, an encapsulation efficiency (EE%) of 86%, and a drug
loading (DL%) of 2.9%. In this study, the encapsulation efficiency
(EE%) of RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs was 81.2 ± 6.3%, and the drug
loading (DL%) was 13.7 ± 0.7% (Table 1). In comparison, our
study’s results appear superior in certain aspects of the
aforementioned characteristics. The higher drug loading in the
current study suggests that a larger amount of rifapentine is
effectively encapsulated in the RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs, which is
important for enhancing the antibacterial efficacy and achieving
sustained drug release. Smaller particle sizes are generally
considered more favorable for extending systemic circulation time.

A lower PDI and a more negative zeta potential suggest improved
uniformity and stability of the nanoparticles. Higher EE% and DL%
may enhance the antibacterial efficacy. In earlier studies, numerous
anti-TB drugs-loaded nanoformulations have been reported,
particularly those involving rifampicin, the most commonly
encapsulated drug.51,63–65 The particle size, PDI, ZP, EE%, and
DL% varied among these formulations, primarily due to differences
in the materials and methods used in their preparation. Compared
to these studies, the nanoparticles in our research demonstrated a
smaller particle size, lower PDI, and higher zeta potential and EE%,
which may be attributed to the combined method employed and the
inherent properties of RPT.
Haemolytic Toxicity
Assessing the hemolysis rate is essential for evaluating the
hemocompatibility of biomaterials, and a low hemolysis rate is
indicative of good biocompatibility and safety for in vivo
applications.66 The hemolysis rates of the four nanomaterials
developed in this study remained below 5% (Figure 3A–C). This
value is well below the generally accepted threshold for hemolysis
in biomedical materials, indicating that the RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG
NPs do not induce significant damage to red blood cells and are
suitable for systemic administration through blood circulation.67
[image]
Figure 3 (A–C) Hemolysis rates of the nanomaterials at
three different wavelengths. (D) In vitro release profiles
of rifapentine (RPT), RPT-PLGA-PEG, and RPT-MAN-
PLGA-PEG NPs at pH 4.5. (E) In vitro release profiles of
rifapentine (RPT), RPT-PLGA-PEG, and RPT-MAN-PLGA-
PEG NPs at pH 7.4, n=9.
Drug Release Study
Controlled drug release is a key advantage of nanostructured
delivery systems over free drugs, enabling selective release at the
specific disease site or within targeted cellular organelles, thereby

improving drug efficacy and reducing toxicity.68 The drug release
behavior of RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs was evaluated under
simulated blood circulation conditions in PBS at pH 7.4 and
simulated lysosomal conditions in PBS at pH 4.5.69,70 As illustrated
in Figure 3D and E, the cumulative release of RPT from RPT-MAN-
PLGA-PEG NPs was 11.44% at 3 hours and 54.95% at 48 hours at
pH 7.4, while at pH 4.5, it reached approximately 18.44% at
3 hours and 74.95% at 48 hours. These results indicate that acidic
conditions enhance the release of RPT from RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG
NPs. As MAN-PLGA-PEG were mainly transported into the acidic
lysosomes of macrophages, RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs would
accelerate RPT release after their entry of lysosomes and initiate
more effective killing of intracellular Mtb. In contrast, free RPT
exhibited an initial burst release, with approximately 90.73%
released within 9 hours. Overall, the ability to maintain therapeutic
concentrations over extended periods makes this controlled release
profile ideal for tuberculosis treatment, reducing dosing frequency
and minimizing adverse effects. The regression coefficients (R²)
were analyzed by fitting the drug release data to four kinetic
models: Zero-order, First-order, Higuchi, and Hixson-Crowell (Table
4). The results demonstrate that the Higuchi model is the most
suitable, as it yielded higher R² values under both pH conditions
(0.9785 and 0.9703 for RPT-PLGA-PEG NPs; 0.9773 and 0.9793 for
RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs). This mathematical model proposes that
the drug release rate is proportional to the square root of time.71,72
[image]
Table 4 Results of the Kinetic Parameters of the Drug
Release Profile Obtained for RPT-PLGA-PEG and RPT-
MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs: Determination Coefficient (R2)
In vitro Cytotoxicity Assay
The cytotoxicity of both drug-loaded NPs and free RPT was assessed
by evaluating cell viability in RAW264.7 macrophage cells. The
results indicate that both drug-loaded NPs exhibited no cytotoxicity
towards macrophages, as cell viability remained above 80% across
all tested concentrations (Figure 4A). In contrast, free RPT at a

concentration of 50 μg/mL resulted in a significant decrease in cell
viability, which dropped below 60%, suggesting that the
nanoformulation may help reduce the inherent cytotoxicity of RPT,
improving its biocompatibility. To further evaluate the effect of the
blank NPs (NPs without the drug) on cell viability, RAW264.7 cells
were co-cultured with various concentrations of blank NPs for
24 hours. The results showed that, at a concentration of 0.6 mg/mL,
the cell viability remained above 90%, indicating that blank NPs
did not induce significant cytotoxicity at this concentration.
However, higher concentrations (1.2 mg/mL) of NPs led to a
reduction in cell viability, although this effect was not as
pronounced as with free RPT (Figure 4B). Importantly, the
concentration of NPs used in practical applications is considerably
lower than this concentration (1.2 mg/mL).
[image]
Figure 4 Cytotoxicity and targeting evaluation of
nanomaterials in macrophages. (A) Cytotoxicity
assessment of free rifapentine (RPT), RPT-PLGA-PEG, and
RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles (NPs) in macrophages,
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. (B) Cytotoxicity of
blank nanoparticles in macrophages, *P < 0.05, **P <
0.01, ***P < 0.001. (C) Time-dependent mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) of different nanoparticles
phagocytosed by macrophages, **P < 0.01, ***P <
0.001. (D, E) Histograms of fluorescence shift in
macrophages after 6 hours of incubation with
coumarin-6-labeled nanoparticles at a drug concentration
of 5.0 μg/mL, n=9. (F) Time-dependent MFI of MAN-
PLGA-PEG and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles in the
presence of D-mannosamine, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001. (G) A fluorescence shift histogram of
macrophages incubated with coumarin-6-labeled
nanoparticles at a drug concentration of 5.0 μg/mL (n=9)
for 6 hours, in the presence of D-mannosamine.
In vitro Cellular Uptake of Macrophage-Targeted
Nanoparticles

The active targeting drug delivery system involves ligand-receptor
interactions between the nanoparticle carrier and target cells or
tissues. These ligands are typically conjugated to the surface of the
drug delivery system, where they are recognized by pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) on macrophages, thereby mediating
endocytosis. PRRs include C-type lectin receptors, Toll-like
receptors (TLRs), NOD-like receptors (NLRs), scavenger receptors,
and Fc receptors.73–75 Among them, C-type lectin receptors can
recognize carbohydrate-rich molecules. The mannose receptor is
one such C-type lectin receptor and can also recognize
lipoarabinomannan on the cell wall of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb).76 As a result, mannose has been widely used as a ligand to
modify nanoparticle drug delivery systems in various studies.
Chokshi et al77 constructed rifampicin-loaded solid lipid
nanoparticles with mannose surface modification. Flow cytometry
analysis showed that mannose-modified solid lipid nanoparticles
were significantly more efficiently internalized by macrophages
compared to the unmodified nanoparticles. After incubation for 5
and 9 hours, the cellular uptake increased by 1.39 and 1.79 times,
respectively, indicating that mannose modification enhances
nanoparticle uptake by macrophages. The qualitative results from
fluorescence microscopy were consistent with the quantitative flow
cytometry data, showing that after 9 hours of incubation,
macrophages internalized more mannose-modified nanoparticles
than unmodified ones. Although the mannose molecule contains
multiple hydroxyl functional groups, these hydroxyls provide
abundant sites for coupling reactions with PLGA-PEG, allowing for
ester linkage formation through esterification.78 However, the
stability of the ester bond formed is more susceptible to hydrolytic
enzymes in the internal environment compared to amide bonds.79
These enzymes can specifically catalyze the hydrolysis of ester
bonds, leading to their cleavage, which results in the premature
detachment of the ligand and consequently affects the targeting
efficacy. In contrast, mannosamine, the amino derivative of
mannose, has an amino group replacing one of the hydroxyl groups
in mannose. Its chemical structure is more hydrophilic and reactive
than mannose. Additionally, PLGA-PEG contains free carboxyl
groups, which can chemically react with the amino group of
mannosamine to form stable amide bonds.80 Based on these
findings, we selected mannosamine as the ligand for targeting

macrophages in our nanoparticle formulation. In this study, to
investigate the macrophage-targeting ability of MAN-PLGA-PEG
NPs, we compared the uptake of MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs and PLGA-
PEG NPs in RAW264.7 cells using flow cytometry. As shown in
Figure 4C and D, the uptake of both NPs by RAW264.7 cells was
time-dependent. However, the cellular uptake of MAN-PLGA-PEG
NPs was significantly higher than that of PLGA-PEG NPs (Figures 4E
and 5), indicating that mannose functionalization substantially
enhanced the targeting efficiency of this PLGA-PEG nanosystem
towards macrophages. At 24 hours, the macrophage uptake rate of
MAN-PLGA-PEG was still four times higher than that of PLGA-PEG,
which was significantly greater than the differences reported in the
aforementioned literature. To further validate the role of D-
mannosamine in the cellular uptake of NPs, we conducted free D-
mannosamine competition experiments, demonstrating that the
addition of free D-mannosamine inhibited the uptake of MAN-
PLGA-PEG NPs in RAW264.7 cells (Figure 4F and G). These findings
support the hypothesis that the selective uptake of MAN-PLGA-PEG
NPs by macrophages is partially mediated by mannose receptor-
dependent endocytosis.81
[image]
Figure 5 Fluorescence imaging of macrophages after
6 hours of co-incubation with PLGA-PEG and MAN-PLGA-
PEG nanoparticles, captured using laser confocal
microscopy. Blue is DAPI and green is nanoparticles
carrying coumarin 6, scale bar: 25 μm, n=9.
In vitro Anti-Tubercular Studies
The microplate-based Alamar Blue Assay (MABA) is a robust
method for determining the inhibitory concentration of test
formulations against M. tuberculosis. The minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) was determined to identify the lowest
concentrations of NPs and free RPT required to inhibit M.
tuberculosis growth in vitro. As shown in Figure 6A, the MIC of free
RPT was 0.2 μg/mL, while the MICs of RPT-PLGA-PEG NPs and
RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs were both 0.047 μg/mL, which represents

an approximately 4.25-fold reduction. This demonstrates that both
nanoparticle formulations are significantly more effective than the
free drug at inhibiting M. tuberculosis growth. The improved
antimycobacterial activity of the NPs is likely due to their enhanced
penetration through the mycobacterial cell wall, as NPs offer a
higher surface area and more efficient delivery of RPT to its site of
action, achieving equivalent efficacy at lower doses.
[image]
Figure 6 Bacteriostatic effect of nanomaterials (A) In
vitro anti-tuberculosis study determining the minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of free rifapentine (RPT),
RPT-PLGA-PEG, and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles
(NPs). Pink indicates bacterial growth, while blue
indicates the absence of bacterial growth, n=6. (B)
Bactericidal effect of RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG versus free
rifapentine against BCG within RAW264.7. (C)
Bactericidal effect of RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG versus free
rifapentine against H37Rv within RAW264.7, **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001, n=6.
Intracellular Inhibition of Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis Test
Currently, drug chemotherapy remains the primary treatment for
tuberculosis(TB). The first-line anti-TB drugs commonly used in
clinical practice primarily include streptomycin, isoniazid, and
rifampicin, developed during the 1990s. However, the emergence of
drug resistance, multidrug resistance, and co-infection with HIV has
made the development of new anti-TB drugs an urgent global
priority. In this study, rifapentine exhibited inhibitory effects
against intracellular BCG and H37Rv, demonstrating superior
antibacterial activity compared to rifampicin as reported by Pi et
al.63 Furthermore, the macrophage-targeting RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG
NPs significantly enhanced the intracellular antibacterial activity of
rifapentine (Figure 6B and C).
Pharmacokinetics and Tissue Distribution Study

Figure 7A illustrates the serum concentration-time profile of the
drug. In comparison to free RPT, which persisted in the system for
only 2 days, the drug-loaded nanoparticles demonstrated an
extended release profile. The key pharmacokinetic parameters are
presented in Table 5. Both types of nanoparticles reduced the drug’s
plasma clearance rate compared to the free drug, as indicated by an
increase in their half-lives by 1.76-fold and 2.03-fold for RPT-PLGA-
PEG NPs and RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs, respectively. Importantly,
the bactericidal efficacy of RPT is dependent on exposure time, with
the mean residence times (MRT) of RPT-PLGA-PEG NPs and RPT-
MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs showing 1.95-fold (47.57 hours) and 2.22-fold
(54.36 hours) increases, respectively, relative to a mere 24.38 hours
for free RPT. A slow and sustained release profile of biodegradable
nanoparticles is a critical feature for effective nanoparticle-
mediated drug delivery. When administered in its free form, RPT
rapidly attained high plasma concentrations within a few hours,
followed by rapid degradation. Conversely, a single administration
of the same RPT dose encapsulated in nanoparticles maintained
plasma levels above the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
throughout all measured time points.
[image]
Table 5 Pharmacokinetic Parameters in Different Groups
[image]
Figure 7 In vivo toxicity assessment and drug content
analysis. (A) Plasma concentration-time profiles following
administration of different drug formulations. (B) Drug
distribution in the organs of SD rats. (C) Hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) staining of heart, liver, spleen, lung, and
kidney tissues from SD rats, scale bar: 100 μm. (D) Serum
biochemistry data for ALT, AST, Cr, and BUN levels, *P <
0.05, **P < 0.01, n=9.
The distribution of RPT across different tissues is shown in Figure
7B. In the free RPT group, the concentration of the drug in the liver
during the within one hour  was significantly higher than that in

the nanoparticle groups, suggesting a potential risk of
hepatotoxicity. Over time, the RPT concentration gradually
decreased as the drug was metabolized and cleared by the liver. The
RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs demonstrated efficient localization in the
lungs compared to free RPT and other nanoparticle formulations.
The efficient localization of nanoparticles in the lungs can be
attributed to the following: 1) Nanoparticles may be sequestered in
the lungs after recirculation due to the filtration effects of lung
capillaries. 2) Nanoparticles are likely cleared from the bloodstream
through phagocytosis by cells of the pulmonary reticuloendothelial
system. Mycobacterium tuberculosis primarily resides within lung
macrophages, necessitating the delivery of RPT at bactericidal
concentrations to the lungs for effective tuberculosis treatment.82
Thus, RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs could serve as a promising strategy
for delivering RPT to lung tissues.
Organ toxicity remains a significant challenge in the clinical use of
antitubercular drugs. In this study, both histological and
biochemical analyses were performed to assess the potential toxicity
of the RPT-loaded NPs in comparison to the free drug. Major organs
of mice were sectioned and subjected to histological analysis using
H&E staining. The results showed no discernible abnormalities in
the heart, spleen, liver, lungs, and kidneys across all four groups
(free RPT, RPT-PLGA-PEG NPs, RPT-MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs, and
controls) (Figure 7C). This suggests that the RPT-loaded NPs did not
cause noticeable organ damage, supporting their potential safety for
systemic administration. To evaluate the potential toxicity of the
NPs further, blood biochemical analysis was conducted to assess
liver and kidney function. NPs are predominantly taken up and
cleared by organs of the reticuloendothelial system (RES), such as
the liver and kidneys.83 Thus, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels were measured to evaluate
liver function, while blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (Cr)
levels were used as biomarkers for kidney function. All groups
showed no significant differences when compared to the control
group (P > 0.05) (Figure 7D). This suggests that the NPs did not
induce any significant liver or kidney toxicity.
Conclusion

In this study, RPT-loaded MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs were prepared using
an ultrasound emulsification method combined with solvent
evaporation, with the goal of enhancing macrophage-targeting
properties and improving anti-mycobacterial activity against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The resulting nanoparticles exhibited
favorable physicochemical properties, with no evidence of
cytotoxicity or hemolytic toxicity, and demonstrated enhanced
macrophage-targeting properties compared to PLGA-PEG NPs. In in
vitro studies, RPT-loaded NPs demonstrated superior efficacy
against Mtb compared to the free drug. Additionally, the NPs were
well tolerated in rat models, showing a reduction in hepatotoxicity,
suggesting that the NPs not only enhanced bactericidal efficacy but
also offered improved safety profiles. Furthermore, the macrophage-
targeting capabilities of the MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs allowed for
effective drug delivery to macrophages, which are the primary host
cells for Mtb, while enabling a reduction in dosing frequency as the
NP-based formulations maintained therapeutic drug concentrations
for extended periods. Consequently, the conventional daily
administration of free RPT could potentially be replaced with
intermittent dosing of these NP-based formulations, thereby
improving patient adherence and reducing the risk of therapeutic
failure and the development of drug resistance. In conclusion, RPT-
loaded MAN-PLGA-PEG NPs represent a promising drug delivery
system for tuberculosis treatment, combining enhanced bactericidal
activity, macrophage-targeting efficiency, and reduced dosing
frequency, making them an attractive alternative to conventional
therapies.
Data Sharing Statement
The data sets generated and analyzed during the current study are
not publicly available but can be obtained from the corresponding
author on reasonable request.
Ethics Approval and Consent to
Participate
The animal study was approved by the Ethics Committee of The

Xinjiang Medical University (No. 20240711-18). The study was
conducted in accordance with the local legislation and institutional
requirements.
Author Contributions
All authors made a significant contribution to the work reported,
whether that is in the conception, study design, execution,
acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation, or in all these areas;
took part in drafting, revising or critically reviewing the article;
gave final approval of the version to be published; have agreed on
the journal to which the article has been submitted; and agree to be
accountable for all aspects of the work.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No.82172454).
Disclosure
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
1. World Health Organization. Global tuberculosis report. (2024).
Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789240101531. Accessed March 10, 2025.
2. Zhai W, Wu F, Zhang Y, Fu Y, Liu Z. The immune escape
mechanisms of mycobacterium tuberculosis. Int J mol Sci.
2019;20(2):340. doi:10.3390/ijms20020340
3. Delogu G, Goletti D. The spectrum of tuberculosis infection: new
perspectives in the era of biologics. J Rheumatol Suppl. 2014;91:11–
16. doi:10.3899/jrheum.140097

4. Pai M, Behr MA, Dowdy D, et al. Tuberculosis. Nat Rev Dis
Primers. 2016;2(1):16076. doi:10.1038/nrdp.2016.76
5. Yunus BR, Ss T, Doble M. Dual delivery of tuberculosis drugs via
cyclodextrin conjugated curdlan nanoparticles to infected
macrophages. Carbohydr Polym. 2019;218:53–62. doi:10.1016/
j.carbpol.2019.04.056
6. Alfarisi O, Alghamdi WA, Al-Shaer MH, Dooley KE, Peloquin CA.
Rifampin vs. rifapentine: what is the preferred rifamycin for
tuberculosis? Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2017;10(10):1027–1036.
doi:10.1080/17512433.2017.1366311
7. Sheikhpour M, Delorme V, Kasaeian A, et al. An effective nano
drug delivery and combination therapy for the treatment of
Tuberculosis. Sci Rep. 2022;12(1):9591. doi:10.1038/
s41598-022-13682-4
8. Liebenberg D, Gordhan BG, Kana BD. Drug resistant tuberculosis:
implications for transmission, diagnosis, and disease management.
Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022;12:943545. doi:10.3389/
fcimb.2022.943545
9. Slj D, Patriota Y, de La Roca MF, Soares-Sobrinho JL. New
perspectives in drug delivery systems for the treatment of
tuberculosis. Curr Med Chem. 2022;29(11):1936–1958.
doi:10.2174/0929867328666210629154908
10. Bourguignon T, Godinez-Leon JA, Gref R. Nanosized drug
delivery systems to fight tuberculosis. Pharmaceutics.
2023;15(2):393. doi:10.3390/pharmaceutics15020393
11. Chae J, Choi Y, Tanaka M, Choi J. Inhalable nanoparticles
delivery targeting alveolar macrophages for the treatment of
pulmonary tuberculosis. J Biosci Bioeng. 2021;132(6):543–551.
doi:10.1016/j.jbiosc.2021.08.009
12. Shen L, Liao K, Yang E, et al. Macrophage targeted iron oxide
nanodecoys augment innate immunological and drug killings for
more effective mycobacterium tuberculosis clearance. J
Nanobiotechnology. 2023;21(1). doi:10.1186/s12951-023-02103-x.

13. Pi J, Chen D, Wang J, et al. Macrophage targeted graphene
oxide nanosystem synergize antibiotic killing and host immune
defense for Tuberculosis Therapy. Pharmacol Res. 2024;208:107379.
doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107379
14. Shao L, Shen S, Liu H. Recent advances in PLGA micro/
nanoparticle delivery systems as novel therapeutic approach for
drug-resistant tuberculosis. Front Bioeng Biotechnol.
2022;10:941077.
15. Wang Y, Xu Y, Song J, et al. Tumor cell-targeting and tumor
microenvironment-responsive nanoplatforms for the multimodal
imaging-guided photodynamic/photothermal/chemodynamic
treatment of cervical cancer. Int J Nanomed. 2024;19:5837–5858.
doi:10.2147/IJN.S466042
16. Tang J, Li J, Li G, et al. Spermidine-mediated poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) nanoparticles containing fluorofenidone for the
treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Int J Nanomed.
2017;12:6687–6704. doi:10.2147/IJN.S140569
17. Chen W, Li Y, Liu C, et al. In situ engineering of tumor-
associated macrophages via a nanodrug-delivering-drug (beta-
elemene@stanene) strategy for enhanced cancer chemo-
immunotherapy. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2023;62(41):e202308413.
doi:10.1002/anie.202308413
18. Lin W, Fan S, Liao K, et al. Engineering zinc oxide hybrid
selenium nanoparticles for synergetic anti-tuberculosis treatment by
combining Mycobacterium tuberculosis killings and host cell
immunological inhibition. Front Cell Infect Microbiol.
2023;12:1074533.
19. Wang H, Li B, Sun Y, et al. NIR-II AIE luminogen-based
erythrocyte-like nanoparticles with granuloma-targeting and self-
oxygenation characteristics for combined phototherapy of
tuberculosis. Adv Mater. 2024;36(38):e2406143. doi:10.1002/
adma.202406143
20. Choi S, Britigan BE, Moran DM, Narayanasamy P. Gallium
nanoparticles facilitate phagosome maturation and inhibit growth

of virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis in macrophages. PLoS One.
2017;12(5):e0177987. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0177987
21. Ma C, Wu M, Ye W, et al. Inhalable solid lipid nanoparticles for
intracellular tuberculosis infection therapy: macrophage-targeting
and pH-sensitive properties. Drug Deliv Transl Res. 2021;11(3):1218–
1235. doi:10.1007/s13346-020-00849-7
22. Xu Y, Kim CS, Saylor DM, Koo D. Polymer degradation and drug
delivery in PLGA-based drug-polymer applications: a review of
experiments and theories. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater.
2017;105(6):1692–1716. doi:10.1002/jbm.b.33648
23. Ding D, Zhu Q. Recent advances of PLGA micro/nanoparticles
for the delivery of biomacromolecular therapeutics. Mater Sci Eng C
Mater Biol Appl. 2018;92:1041–1060. doi:10.1016/
j.msec.2017.12.036
24. Bahlool AZ, Fattah S, O’Sullivan A, et al. Development of
Inhalable ATRA-Loaded PLGA nanoparticles as host-directed
immunotherapy against tuberculosis. Pharmaceutics.
2022;14(8):1745. doi:10.3390/pharmaceutics14081745
25. Mir M, Ahmed N, Rehman AU. Recent applications of PLGA
based nanostructures in drug delivery. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces.
2017;159:217–231. doi:10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.07.038
26. Kim KT, Lee JY, Kim DD, Yoon IS, Cho HJ. Recent progress in
the development of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based
nanostructures for cancer imaging and therapy. Pharmaceutics.
2019;11(6):280. doi:10.3390/pharmaceutics11060280
27. Xu Q, Ensign LM, Boylan NJ, et al. Impact of surface
Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) density on biodegradable nanoparticle
transport in mucus ex vivo and distribution in vivo. ACS Nano.
2015;9(9):9217–9227. doi:10.1021/acsnano.5b03876
28. Cummings RD. The mannose receptor ligands and the
macrophage glycome. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2022;75:102394.
doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2022.102394

29. Mukhtar M, Csaba N, Robla S, et al. Dry powder comprised of
isoniazid-loaded nanoparticles of hyaluronic acid in conjugation
with mannose-anchored chitosan for macrophage-targeted
pulmonary administration in tuberculosis. Pharmaceutics.
2022;14(8):1543. doi:10.3390/pharmaceutics14081543
30. Prabhu P, Fernandes T, Chaubey P, et al. Mannose-conjugated
chitosan nanoparticles for delivery of Rifampicin to Osteoarticular
tuberculosis. Drug Deliv Transl Res. 2021;11(4):1509–1519.
doi:10.1007/s13346-021-01003-7
31. Yang Z, Lou C, Wang X, et al. Preparation, characterization, and
in-vitro cytotoxicity of nanoliposomes loaded with anti-tubercular
drugs and TGF-beta1 siRNA for improving spinal tuberculosis
therapy. BMC Infect Dis. 2022;22(1):824. doi:10.1186/
s12879-022-07791-8
32. Grotz E, Tateosian N, Amiano N, et al. Nanotechnology in
tuberculosis: state of the art and the challenges ahead. Pharm Res.
2018;35(11):213. doi:10.1007/s11095-018-2497-z
33. Jarvis B, Lamb HM. Rifapentine. Drugs. 1998;56(4):607–616.
[discussion 617]. doi:10.2165/00003495-199856040-00008
34. Chan JG, Bai X, Traini D. An update on the use of rifapentine
for tuberculosis therapy. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2014;11(3):421–
431. doi:10.1517/17425247.2014.877886
35. Makadia HK, Siegel SJ. Poly Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid (PLGA) as
biodegradable controlled drug delivery carrier. Polymers (Basel).
2011;3(3):1377–1397. doi:10.3390/polym3031377
36. Wang J, Li J, Ren J. Surface modification of poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) microspheres with enhanced hydrophilicity and
dispersibility for arterial embolization. Materials. 2019;12(12):1959.
37. D’Souza AA, Shegokar R. Polyethylene glycol (PEG): a versatile
polymer for pharmaceutical applications. Expert Opin Drug Deliv.
2016;13(9):1257–1275. doi:10.1080/17425247.2016.1182485
38. Avgoustakis K. Pegylated poly(lactide) and poly(lactide-co-

glycolide) nanoparticles: preparation, properties and possible
applications in drug delivery. Curr Drug Deliv. 2004;1(4):321–333.
doi:10.2174/1567201043334605
39. Zambito G, Deng S, Haeck J, et al. Fluorinated PLGA-PEG-
mannose nanoparticles for tumor-associated macrophage detection
by optical imaging and MRI. Front Med Lausanne. 2021;8.
doi:10.3389/fmed.2021.712367
40. Praphakar RA, Munusamy MA, Alarfaj AA, Kumar SS, Rajan M.
Zn2+ cross-linked sodium alginate-g-allylamine-mannose polymeric
carrier of rifampicin for macrophage targeting tuberculosis
nanotherapy. New J Chem. 2017;41(19):11324–11334. doi:10.1039/
C7NJ01808H
41. Liang Q, Zhang P, Zhang L, et al. Development of tetracycline-
modified nanoparticles for bone-targeted delivery of anti-tubercular
drug. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023;11:1207520.
42. Tariq M, Alam MA, Singh AT, Panda AK, Talegaonkar S. Surface
decorated nanoparticles as surrogate carriers for improved transport
and absorption of epirubicin across the gastrointestinal tract:
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic investigations. Int J Pharm.
2016;501(1–2):18–31. doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2016.01.054
43. D’Souza S, Du Plessis SM, Egieyeh S, et al. Physicochemical and
biological evaluation of curdlan-poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
nanoparticles as a host-directed therapy against mycobacterium
tuberculosis. J Pharm Sci. 2022;111(2):469–478. doi:10.1016/
j.xphs.2021.09.012
44. Nie Y, Li D, Peng Y, et al. Metal organic framework coated
MnO(2) nanosheets delivering doxorubicin and self-activated
DNAzyme for chemo-gene combinatorial treatment of cancer. Int J
Pharm. 2020;585:119513. doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2020.119513
45. Liang Q, Xiang H, Li X, et al. Development of Rifapentine-
Loaded PLGA-based nanoparticles: in vitro characterisation and in
vivo study in mice. Int J Nanomed. 2020;15:7491–7507.
doi:10.2147/IJN.S257758

46. Rani S, Gothwal A, Pandey PK, et al. HPMA-PLGA based
nanoparticles for effective in vitro delivery of rifampicin. Pharm
Res. 2019;36(1). doi:10.1007/s11095-018-2543-x.
47. Care NRCU, Animals AUOL. Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals. 2011.
48. Yang Y, Huang Z, Li J, et al. PLGA porous microspheres dry
powders for codelivery of afatinib‐loaded solid lipid nanoparticles
and paclitaxel: novel therapy for EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
resistant nonsmall cell lung cancer. Adv Healthc Mater. 2019;8(23).
doi:10.1002/adhm.201900965.
49. Tukulula M, Hayeshi R, Fonteh P, et al. Curdlan-conjugated
PLGA nanoparticles possess macrophage stimulant activity and drug
delivery capabilities. Pharm Res. 2015; 32:2713–2726.
50. Vieira AC, Magalhães J, Rocha S, et al. Targeted macrophages
delivery of rifampicin-loaded lipid nanoparticles to improve
tuberculosis treatment. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2017;12(24):2721–
2736. doi:10.2217/nnm-2017-0248
51. Carneiro SP, Carvalho KV, de Oliveira ASR, et al. Funct
ionalized rifampicin-loaded nanostructured lipid carriers enhance
macrophages uptake and antimycobacterial activity. Colloids Surf B
Biointerfaces. 2019;175:306–313. doi:10.1016/
j.colsurfb.2018.12.003
52. Rafiei P, Haddadi A. Docetaxel-loaded PLGA and PLGA-PEG
nanoparticles for intravenous application: pharmacokinetics and
biodistribution profile. Int J Nanomed. 2017;12:935–947.
doi:10.2147/IJN.S121881
53. Rao J. Shedding light on tumors using nanoparticles. ACS Nano.
2008;2(10):1984–1986. doi:10.1021/nn800669n
54. Kircher MF, Mahmood U, King RS, Weissleder R, Josephson L. A
multimodal nanoparticle for preoperative magnetic resonance
imaging and intraoperative optical brain tumor delineation. Cancer
Res. 2003;63(23):8122–8125.

55. Owens DR, Peppas NA. Opsonization, biodistribution, and
pharmacokinetics of polymeric nanoparticles. Int J Pharm.
2006;307(1):93–102. doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2005.10.010
56. Liu Y, Wu X, Mi Y, et al. PLGA nanoparticles for the oral
delivery of nuciferine: preparation, physicochemical
characterization and in vitro/in vivo studies. Drug Deliv.
2017;24(1):443–451. doi:10.1080/10717544.2016.1261381
57. Yoo JW, Chambers E, Mitragotri S. Factors that control the
circulation time of nanoparticles in blood: challenges, solutions and
future prospects. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(21):2298–2307.
doi:10.2174/138161210791920496
58. Wang J, Sui M, Fan W. Nanoparticles for tumor targeted
therapies and their pharmacokinetics. Curr Drug Metab.
2010;11(2):129–141. doi:10.2174/138920010791110827
59. Haggag Y, Abdel-Wahab Y, Ojo O, et al. Preparation and in vivo
evaluation of insulin-loaded biodegradable nanoparticles prepared
from diblock copolymers of PLGA and PEG. Int J Pharm.
2016;499(1–2):236–246. doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.12.063
60. Mahanta AK, Chaulagain B, Trivedi R, Singh J. Mannose-
functionalized chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles for brain-
targeted codelivery of CBD and BDNF for the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2024;15(21):4021–4032.
doi:10.1021/acschemneuro.4c00392
61. Singodia D, Verma A, Verma RK, Mishra PR. Investigations into
an alternate approach to target mannose receptors on macrophages
using 4-sulfated N-acetyl galactosamine more efficiently in
comparison with mannose-decorated liposomes: an application in
drug delivery. Nanomed Nanotechnol Biol Med. 2012;8(4):468–477.
doi:10.1016/j.nano.2011.07.002
62. Magalhaes J, Cl L, Va C, et al. Optimization of rifapentine-
loaded lipid nanoparticles using a quality-by-design strategy.
Pharmaceutics. 2020;12(1). doi:10.3390/pharmaceutics12010075.
63. Pi J, Shen L, Shen H, et al. Mannosylated graphene oxide as

macrophage-targeted delivery system for enhanced intracellular
M.tuberculosis killing efficiency. Mater Sci Eng C. 2019;103:109777.
doi:10.1016/j.msec.2019.109777
64. Hetta HF, Ahmed EA, Hemdan AG, et al. Modulation of
rifampicin-induced hepatotoxicity using poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
nanoparticles: a study on rat and cell culture models. Nanomedicine
(Lond). 2020;15(14):1375–1390. doi:10.2217/nnm-2020-0001
65. Jahagirdar PS, Gupta PK, Kulkarni SP, Devarajan PV.
Intramacrophage delivery of dual drug loaded nanoparticles for
effective clearance of mycobacterium tuberculosis. J Pharm Sci.
2020;109(7):2262–2270. doi:10.1016/j.xphs.2020.03.018
66. Wei Y, Liang J, Zheng X, et al. Lung-targeting drug delivery
system of baicalin-loaded nanoliposomes: development,
biodistribution in rabbits, and pharmacodynamics in nude mice
bearing orthotopic human lung cancer. Int J Nanomed.
2017;12:251–261. doi:10.2147/IJN.S119895
67. Tao Y, Jiao G, Zhao X, et al. Amino acid-crosslinked 4arm-PLGA
Janus patch with anti-adhesive and anti-bacterial properties for
hernia repair. Colloids Surf. B. 2024;243:114126. doi:10.1016/
j.colsurfb.2024.114126
68. Singh SK, Singh S, Lillard JJ, Singh R. Drug delivery approaches
for breast cancer. Int J Nanomed. 2017;12:6205–6218. doi:10.2147/
IJN.S140325
69. Li M, Tang Z, Lv S, et al. Cisplatin crosslinked pH-sensitive
nanoparticles for efficient delivery of doxorubicin. Biomaterials.
2014;35(12):3851–3864. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.01.018
70. Pourjavadi A, Tehrani ZM. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles with
bilayer coating of poly(acrylic acid-co-itaconic acid) and human
serum albumin (HSA): a pH-sensitive carrier for gemcitabine
delivery. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2016;61:782–790.
doi:10.1016/j.msec.2015.12.096
71. Silva AC, Kumar A, Wild W, et al. Long-term stability,
biocompatibility and oral delivery potential of risperidone-loaded

solid lipid nanoparticles. Int J Pharm. 2012;436(1–2):798–805.
doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2012.07.058
72. Costa P, Sousa LJ. Modeling and comparison of dissolution
profiles. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2001;13(2):123–133. doi:10.1016/
S0928-0987(01)00095-1
73. Paurević M, Šrajer Gajdošik M, Ribić R. Mannose ligands for
mannose receptor targeting. Int J mol Sci. 2024;25(3):1370.
doi:10.3390/ijms25031370
74. Krishnan V, Nath S, Nair P, Das B. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and its clever approaches to escape the deadly macrophage. World J
Microbiol Biotechnol. 2023;39(11). doi:10.1007/
s11274-023-03735-9
75. Lin W, Shen C, Li M, et al. Programmable macrophage vesicle
based bionic self-adjuvanting vaccine for immunization against
monkeypox virus. Adv Sci. 2024;12(1):e2408608. doi:10.1002/
advs.202408608
76. Hmama Z, Pena-Diaz S, Joseph S, Av-Gay Y. Immunoevasion
and immunosuppression of the macrophage by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Immunol Rev. 2015;264(1):220–232. doi:10.1111/
imr.12268
77. Chokshi NV, Rawal S, Solanki D, et al. Fabrication and
characterization of surface engineered rifampicin loaded lipid
nanoparticulate systems for the potential treatment of tuberculosis:
an in vitro and in vivo evaluation. J Pharm Sci. 2021;110(5):2221–
2232. doi:10.1016/j.xphs.2021.02.018
78. Fan Z, Wang Y, Xiang S, et al. Dual-self-recognizing, stimulus-
responsive and carrier-free methotrexate-mannose conjugate
nanoparticles with highly synergistic chemotherapeutic effects. J
Mater Chem B. 2020;8(9):1922–1934. doi:10.1039/D0TB00049C
79. Hofmann J, Spatz P, Walther R, et al. Synthesis and biological
evaluation of flavonoid-cinnamic acid amide hybrids with distinct
activity against neurodegeneration in vitro and in vivo. Chemistry.
2022;28(39):e202200786. doi:10.1002/chem.202200786

80. Li X, Xiu X, Su R, et al. Immune cell receptor-specific
nanoparticles as a potent adjuvant for nasal split influenza vaccine
delivery. Nanotechnology. 2024;35(12): 125101.
81. Pi J, Shen L, Yang E, et al. Macrophage‐targeted isoniazid–
selenium nanoparticles promote antimicrobial immunity and
synergize bactericidal destruction of tuberculosis bacilli. Angew
Chem. 2020;132(8):3252–3260. doi:10.1002/ange.201912122
82. Liu Z, Li X, Xiu B, et al. A novel and simple preparative method
for uniform-sized PLGA microspheres: preliminary application in
antitubercular drug delivery. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces.
2016;145:679–687. doi:10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.05.085
83. Ganipineni LP, Ucakar B, Joudiou N, et al. Magnetic targeting of
paclitaxel-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-based nanoparticles
for the treatment of glioblastoma. Int J Nanomed. 2018;13:4509–
4521. doi:10.2147/IJN.S165184
[image] © 2025 The Author(s). This work is published and licensed
by Dove Medical Press Limited. The full terms of this license are
available at https://www.dovepress.com/terms.php and incorporate
the Creative Commons Attribution - Non Commercial (unported,
3.0) License. By accessing the work you hereby accept the Terms.
Non-commercial uses of the work are permitted without any further
permission from Dove Medical Press Limited, provided the work is
properly attributed. For permission for commercial use of this work,
please see paragraphs 4.2 and 5 of our Terms.
Download Article [PDF] 
Recommended articles
Original Research
[image]
A Tissue-Tended Mycophenolate-Modified
Nanoparticle Alleviates Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus in MRL/Lpr Mouse Model Mainly by
Promoting Local M2-Like Macrophagocytes

Polarization
[image]
Jiang B, Zhang Y, Li Y, Chen Y, Sha S, Zhao L, Li D, Wen J, Lan J,
Lou Y, Su H, Zhang C, Zhu J, Tao J
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2022, 17:3251-3267
Published Date: 28 July 2022
Review
[image]
Recent Research Advances in Nano-Based Drug
Delivery Systems for Local Anesthetics
Ma H, Pan Z, Lai B, Zan C, Liu H
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2023, 17:2639-2655
Published Date: 30 August 2023
Review
Nanotechnology for the Diagnosis and Treatment of
Liver Cancer
Cai Y, Wang W, Jiao Q, Hu T, Ren Y, Su X, Li Z, Feng M, Liu X,
Wang Y
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2024, 19:13805-13821
Published Date: 24 December 2024
Review

Nanomaterial-Based Drug Delivery Systems Targeting
Functional Cells for Osteoarthritis Treatment:
Mechanisms, Challenges and Future Prospects
[image]
Kong H, He Q, Han J, Zhang XA
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2025, 20:5291-5320
Published Date: 25 April 2025
Original Research
ZnO NPs Attenuate LPS-Induced Inflammation in
RAW264.7 Macrophages by Inhibiting NF-κB and
JAK1-STAT1/STAT3 Pathways and Reducing ROS
Tang H, Zhang L, Deng C, Li Y, Ren G, Sun Z, Chang L, Xu M, Xiao
D, Zhang H
Journal of Inflammation Research 2025, 18:14075-14096
Published Date: 9 October 2025
Contact Us   •  Privacy Policy   •  Associations & Partners   • 
Testimonials   •  Terms & Conditions   •  Recommend this site • 
Cookies •  Top
Contact Us  •  Privacy Policy
© Copyright 2025  •  Dove Medical Press Ltd   •  php coding by
phplab.nz • Web Design by Adhesion
The opinions expressed in all articles published here are those of
the specific author(s), and do not necessarily reflect the views of

Dove Medical Press Ltd or any of its employees.
Dove Medical Press is part of Taylor & Francis Group, the Academic
Publishing Division of Informa PLC
Copyright 2025 Informa PLC. All rights reserved. This site is owned
and operated by Informa PLC ( “Informa”) whose registered office is
5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and
Wales. Number 3099067. UK VAT Group: GB 365 4626 36