1. Introduction

For the past decade, considerable research efforts have aimed at developing controlled release systems for protein and peptide drugs from biodegradable materials such as poly(

-lactic acid) (PLA) or poly(

-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)

. Entrapment in these polymers has been found to be beneficial in several ways. While proteins and peptides were protected from proteolysis, drug release could be prolonged substantially and therapeutic effects enhanced

. Despite the success of this strategy, PLA and PLGA may not provide a microenvironment that is unequivocally suitable for all protein and peptide drugs

. Since most representatives of this class of drugs are subject to physical and chemical instability, it turned out to be a major challenge to design controlled release devices that preserve the biological activity of proteins and peptides

. Consequently, major research efforts have been undertaken to investigate the impact of processing techniques as well as to reveal the physicochemical conditions that prevail during PLA and PLGA erosion and the effect thereof on the stability of drugs

,

,

. Valuable information on polymer degradation

mechanisms of protein/polymer

and peptide/polymer

interactions as well as potential sources of irreversible protein inactivation have been identified this way

. Elevated levels of moisture, providing sufficient protein mobility for reactivity, the acidic microclimate induced by acidic degradation products, the carboxylic acid end groups on the polymer and protein adsorption on polymer surfaces are a few of the innumerable parameters that were identified to cause protein instabilities, mainly via unfolding and aggregation

.

In recent years, we investigated the stability of peptides during release and have revealed that they are subject to an acylation reaction during which lactic and glycolic acids are attached to amine groups of the N-terminal and lysine side chains

. Since then, the mechanism has been confirmed for a number of peptides

,

. From our first studies it was obvious that different species of peptides reacted with different intensities

. As numerous cytokines are interesting drug candidates for controlled release devices, we were interested in the effect of molecular weight on the process. We, therefore, selected insulin as a high molecular weight peptide. Insulin-loaded PLA and PLGA microspheres were manufactured using multiple emulsion techniques and characterized for morphology, size, insulin loading efficiency and drug release profile. We then monitored the stability during polymer erosion with a special emphasis on acylation reactions using HPLC and HPLC-MS analysis.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Materials

Poly(d,l-lactic acid) with equal amounts of d- and l-lactic acid (PLA, Mw 17,000, Resomer R 202) and Poly(d,l-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA, Mw 14,100, Resomer RG 502) with a lactide/glycolide ratio of 50:50, both end-capped by an ethylester group, were obtained from Boehringer Ingelheim (Ingelheim, Germany). Bovine insulin (51 amino acids, Mw 5734 Da) was kindly supplied by Aventis (Frankfurt, Germany). Concentrated lactic acid, analytical grade (approximately 90%), was purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Poly(vinyl alcohol) PVA, 98% hydrolyzed (Av. Mw 13,000–23,000) was obtained from Aldrich Chemical Co. (Milwaukee, USA), 4,4−-Dicarboxy-2-2−-biquinoline (Bicinchoninic acid, BCA) from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, USA). Acetonitrile was obtained from Baker (Deventer, The Netherlands). Triflouroacetic acid (TFA) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Seelze, Germany). All other reagents were of analytical grade or higher purity. Water used throughout the investigation was double-distilled and filtered through a cellulose nitrate filter with pores of 0.2 μm diameter (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany).

2.2. Stability of insulin in lactic acid solutions

Insulin was dissolved in different lactic acid solutions (1%, 5%, 10% and 20% w/w) to get insulin concentrations of 170, 210, 110 and 250 μg/ml, respectively. The resulting solutions (10 ml) were stored in 15 ml polypropylene tubes (Corning Costar, Bodenheim, Germany) at 37 °C for 4 weeks. Samples were drawn on days 7, 14, 21 and 28, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C (HERAfreeze HFU 586 basic from Kendro, Hanau, Germany) until further analysis. The samples were analyzed using the HPLC-MS method described below.

2.3. Preparation of insulin-loaded microspheres

Insulin-loaded microspheres were prepared by a double emulsion-solvent evaporation technique

. In brief, the internal aqueous phase (200 μl of 0.1 N HCl) containing 15 mg insulin was added to the organic phase (300 mg polymer dissolved in 2 ml methylene chloride) under vortex mixing for 30 s and sonication over 40 s in an ice bath using an ultrasound nozzle (250-D Branson Digital Sonifier, Schwäbisch Gmünd, Germany). 4 ml of a 1% aqueous PVA solution was added to the mixture as an external aqueous phase with 10 s of vortex mixing. The dispersion was then rapidly added to 100 ml of 0.5% aqueous PVA solution and stirred for 2 h to evaporate the solvent. The hardened microspheres were centrifuged, washed twice with double-distilled water, freeze-dried and finally stored at −80 °C.

2.4. Investigation of microsphere loading efficiency

10 mg of freeze-dried microspheres was weighed into a 2 ml micro test tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and dissolved in 600 μl of dichloromethane. 600 μl of a 0.1 N HCl solution were added and the two phases were vortex-mixed (Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany). The dispersion was allowed to settle at room temperature for 10 min before the dichloromethane phase was separated from the mixture by centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 3 min (G-S-15R, Beckman, Palo, Atto, CA, USA). The upper aqueous phase containing the extracted peptide was analyzed using a micro BCA assay and HPLC analysis.

2.5. HPLC and HPLC-MS analysis

Insulin samples were investigated by HPLC using a setup that consisted of a degasser (from Knauer, Berlin, Germany), LC-10-AT pump, FCV-10ATVP gradient mixer, SIL-10 ADVP autosampler, SPD-10 AV UV detector and SCL-10AVP controller (all from Schimadzu, Duisburg, Germany). A linear gradient of 15% to 40% solvent B (90% acetonitrile aqueous solution + 0.1% v/v TFA) in solvent A (10% acetonitrile aqueous solution + 0.1% v/v TFA) over 42 min was applied as mobile phase at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. 100-μl samples were separated at room temperature using a combination of a C18 reversed phase pre-column (LC318, 4.6 mm × 50 mm) and analytical column (LC318, 4.6 mm × 250 mm) from Supelco (Deisenhofen, Germany). Chromatograms were recorded at 274 nm (UV detector).

For HPLC-MS analysis, samples were analysed using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system with degasser, binary pump, autosampler, column oven and diode array detector (all from Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany), coupled with a TSQ7000 mass spectrometer (ThermoQuest, San Jose, CA, USA) with API2-source (capillary temperature: 300 °C, spray voltage: 4 kV). A linear gradient of 20–95% solvent B (acetonitrile + 0.1% v/v TFA) in solvent A (double-distilled water + 0.1% v/v TFA) over 30 min served as a mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. About 10–20 μl of the samples were separated using a C18 reversed phase analytical column (Jupiter, 2 mm × 250 mm) from Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany. The XCALIBUR® software package (ThermoQuest, San Joœe, CA, USA) was used for data acquisition and analysis.

2.6. Microstructure and particle size distribution of insulin-loaded microspheres

The microsphere morphology was investigated after manufacturing and freeze-drying as well as after the release study by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (DSM 950 from Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). To investigate their internal structure, microspheres were torn between two layers of adhesive tape (Tesa glasklar, Beiersdorf, Hamburg, Germany). All samples were sputter-coated with a 1.4 nm layer of gold/palladium (Paleron SC515 SEM coating system from Fison Surface System, East Grinstead, UK) prior to SEM analysis.

The size distribution of insulin-loaded PLA and PLGA microspheres was investigated using laser light diffraction (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments, Herrenberg, Germany). For a typical experiment, about 10 mg of microspheres was suspended in 5 ml water and analyzed with an obscuration index (measure of the amount of light lost due to the introduction of the sample into the light path) ranging from 2% to 5%. All samples were analyzed in triplicate. To characterize the size distribution, we assessed the weighted mean of the volume distribution. The sizes below which 10% (d(0.1)), 50% (d(0.5)) and 90% (d(0.9)) of the microspheres fell were especially useful to characterize the microsphere size distribution in more detail.

2.7. Insulin release studies

For the investigation of peptide release from biodegradable polymer microspheres, approximately 10 mg of microspheres was weighed into a 2 ml micro test tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and incubated in 1 ml phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4 (stabilized with 0.02% w/v sodium azide). The samples were eroded under gentle shaking (frequency 10 min−1) at 37 °C in a shaking water bath (Model 1086 from GFL, Burgwerdel, Germany). The buffer was changed and release samples were taken at regular time intervals. All samples were analyzed in triplicate and stored at −80 °C until further analysis.

2.8. Assessment of insulin integrity

The stability of bovine insulin inside polymer microspheres was determined after 6, 12 and 18 days. Microspheres were harvested from the release medium by centrifugation and insulin was extracted using the method described above. The aqueous phase was investigated immediately using HPLC and HPLC-MS analysis.

4. Discussion

When bovine insulin was extracted from PLA and PLGA microspheres after 18 days of erosion, HPLC-MS analysis showed that a considerable amount of protein had undergone structural changes. Changes in insulin molecular mass indicate that the main degradation product is desamido insulin. Surprisingly, an acylation with monomers, as has been reported for many peptides, could not be verified, despite an acylation in lactic acid solutions.

Brange et al.

showed that insulin can decompose via a multitude of different chemical reactions. It may deamidate along two main reaction pathways by entirely different mechanisms. In acid media, deamidation of asparagine in position 21 of the A-chain catalyzed intramolecularly by the protonated C-terminal seems to be the prevailing mechanism. This deamidation of bovine insulin in PLGA microspheres has already been extensively reported in the literature

. It seems to be spurred by the acidic conditions that prevail during PLA and PLGA degradation. For porcine insulin, in contrast, the two major instability mechanisms were again Asn A21 deamidation and dimer formation

. Similar to the findings in this study Shao et al.

reported slow and incomplete porcine insulin release from PLA and PLGA microspheres. It was reported that only about 11% of the insulin extracted from microspheres after release over a period of 4 weeks was intact. The degradation products observed consisted of about 15% deamidated Asn A21 insulin, about 22% covalent insulin dimer and trace amounts of high molecular weight transformation products. Above pH 6, an intermediate imide formation occurs at residue Asn B3, leading to the formation of iso Asp and Asp derivatives.

While the presence of a deamidation product was of little surprise to us, we were amazed that no acylation of insulin occurred during the erosion of PLA or PLGA micropsheres. Its reaction with oligomers in lactic acid solution shows, however, that it is in general prone to this instability mechanism. Na et al.

as well as Lucke et al.

showed that the primary amines of the N-teminal or in the lysine side chains are targets for peptide acylation by lactide and glycolide oligomers. Insulin contains three such potential acylation sites: two N-terminal amino acids (Phe

and Gly

) and one lysine side chain (Lys

). Strickley and Anderson

showed that in solution at pH 2.5 and 35 °C, insulin degrades by deamidation and covalent dimerization at the C-terminal Asn

. This mechanism is initiated by an intramolecular nucleophilic attack of the protonated carboxylic acid of the C-terminal on a side chain amide, forming a reactive cyclic anhydride intermediate. It has been described that this intermediate reacts with water to form desamido

insulin. Alternatively, it can bind to the Phe

N-terminal amine groups of Phe

and Gly

of other insulin molecules to form desamido

-Phe

or desamido

-Gly

, respectively, whereby the latter reaction is slower than the first one. Reactions with the lysine side chain have not yet been reported.

The selectivity of the reaction with the three nucleophiles can be explained on the basis of the pKa values of their individual amino groups (PheB1 < 7.0, GlyA1 ≈ 8.0 and LysB29 > 9.0). The amine with the lowest pKa, PheB1, is likely to be the least protonated one inside the acidic microenvironment of the microparticles. Therefore, it will react faster than its two ‘competitors’. This is supported by the fact that the lysine side chain with its high pKa is not involved at all in the formation of dimers.

The deamidation mechanism may also explain why we see no acylation products during microsphere erosion. Both cyclic intermediates of insulin and of PLA and PLGA oligomers compete for the same nucleophiles during the formation of covalent dimers and during acylation. Under the conditions that prevail inside the microspheres, the reactive cyclic anhydride inside insulin most likely has a higher reactivity than the five-membered ring oligomer intermediate that was shown to form at the carboxy terminal of PLA and PLGA oligomers. Therefore, by virtue of kinetic reaction control, the deamidation and dimerization may be favored. In addition, insulin exists as monomers in low concentrations only (< 0.1 μM ≈ 0.6 μg/ml). At higher concentrations (< 0.01 mM) and low pH values, insulin dimerizes covalently, as described above, and non-covalently. The data obtained by Kaplan et al.

indicated that at least the B29 Lys amino group of insulin is involved in this process and is, therefore, not available for an acylation reaction. Moreover, in contrast to the small peptides, the complex secondary and tertiary structures of insulin may provide a sterically hindered environment and thus prevent the attack of any available free amino groups by the acylating agent.

In the control experiments with lactic acid solutions, the slower reaction of the intermediate seems to be compensated by the higher oligomer concentration. Furthermore, insulin cannot escape acylation by adsorption due to the missing polymer surface.

Microspheres	Mean [μm]	d (0.1) [μm]	d (0.5) [μm]	d (0.9) [μm]
PLA	41	22	38	63
PLGA	53	30	50	80