Abstract

Purpose

Nelfinavir (NFV), a FDA approved antiretroviral drug, has been reported to exhibit cancer cells growth inhibition and increased apoptosis. However, it requires a higher dose leading to toxicity, thus limiting its potential clinical translation. We aim to develop biodegradable (poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)) PLGA nanoparticles of nelfinavir and determine their efficacy to treat non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Experimental Design

HIV protease inhibitor, NFV, was loaded into PLGA nanoparticles by double emulsion/solvent evaporation method; and nanoparticles were characterized for physicochemical characteristics including morphology and intracellular uptake. Their anti-cancer efficacy in NSCLC was assessed by in vitro assays including cytotoxicity, cellular migration, colony formation; and 3D spheroid culture mimicking in-vivo tumor microenvironment. Studies were also conducted to elucidate effects on molecular pathways including apoptosis, autophagy, and endoplasmic stress.

Results

NFV loaded PLGA nanoparticles (NPs) were found to have particle size: 191.1 ± 10.0 nm, zeta potential: −24.3 ± 0.9 mV, % drug loading: 2.5 ± 0.0%; and entrapment efficiency (EE): 30.1 ± 0.5%. NFV NP inhibited proliferation of NSCLC cells compared to NFV and exhibited significant IC50 reduction. From the caspase-dependent apoptosis assays and western blot studies (upregulation of ATF3), it was revealed that NFV NP significantly induced ER stress marker ATF3, cleaved PARP and further caused autophagy inhibition (LC3BII upregulation) leading to increased cellular death. In addition, NFV NP were found to be more efficacious in penetrating solid tumors in ex-vivo studies compared to plain NFV.

Conclusions

Nelfinavir, a lead HIV protease inhibitor can be repositioned as a NSCLC therapeutic through nanoparticulate delivery. Given its ability to induce apoptosis and efficient tumor penetration capability, NFV loaded PLGA nanoparticulate systems provide a promising delivery system in NSCLC treatment.

Similar content being viewed by others

Introduction

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide in both men and women with Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounting for approximately 85% of lung cancer cases (1). Even though there are major advancements in the field of discovery and development of novel drugs and delivery systems, it still remains a challenging task to treat NSCLC. Moreover, there is growing evidence that cancer cells develop resistance to chemotherapeutic agents upon chronic use, which makes it imperative to identify newer drugs with exceptional anticancer activity. As it takes 12–15 years for developing a new drug in the traditional drug discovery process, drug repositioning (repurposing) has been drawing significant attention because of its ability to identify new use of already FDA approved molecules and hence accelerate the development process at lower costs (2).

A multitude of growth factors or signaling pathways are involved in cancer pathogenesis, phenotypically represented by uncontrolled cancer cell proliferation. NSCLC progression is often associated with activation of several intracellular signal pathways causing enhanced cellular proliferation and/or diminished apoptosis (3,4). Particularly, endoplasmic stress and autophagy have been shown to play vital roles in regulation of tumor microenvironment (5,6). NSCLC disease pathogenesis is also characterized by dysregulation of cell death pathways including autophagy apoptosis mechanisms for its pathogenesis (7), hence targeting these processes could be of considerable interest. In addition, there are multiple studies reporting the association between these two processes further leading to tumor growth (8,9). Thus, finding a class of FDA approved drugs that can show prominent effects on these processes would be beneficial.

Protease inhibitors (PIs) are a novel class of antiviral drugs which have been imperative tools in treatment of Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. First generation PIs (Sequinavir and ritonavir) were approved by the FDA in 1995–96; and since then several newer generation PIs have been approved. PI therapy was instrumental in approximately 3-fold reduction in HIV-related deaths in the United States (10). Additionally, several recent studies support that PIs also possess antitumor activities including activities against lung cancer (4), breast cancer (11), melanoma (12) and ovarian cancer (13), independent of their HIV protease inhibitory activity. There are other reports highlighting the possible use of PIs as cancer therapeutics (14,15). Another study by Gills et al. reported that anticancer activity of PIs is independent of their HIV protease inhibition through assessing the potential of various PIs (16). Among the protease inhibitors investigated for anticancer efficacy, nelfinavir (NFV), a second generation antiviral PI, has been studied by various researchers to explore its ability to inhibit the growth of cancer cells and is reported to significantly exhibit cancer cells growth inhibition and increased apoptosis (17,18). Nelfinavir was also studied for its efficacy to induce growth arrest and apoptosis in NSCLC cell lines such as NCI-H460, A549 etc. (4). Interestingly, NFV was also reported to inhibit Akt signaling, thus sensitizing NSCLC cells for chemotherapy (4). These studies raise interesting points regarding the mechanisms exploited by nelfinavir to inhibit autophagy and have implications for clinical development of nelfinavir as an anti-cancer agent.

NFV makes an interesting choice because of its well documented in-vitro anti-tumoral effects and current clinical studies to confirm its efficacy (19). However, the dose required for NFV’s anticancer effects is shown to be very high. In one of the seminal studies, Gills et al. demonstrated NFV to be effective against NSCLC xenografts in mice with once-daily intraperitoneal injections of 100 mg/kg NFV (16), with a human equivalent dose (HED) of 8.1 mg/kg (20). Given highly variable oral bioavailability of NFV (20–80%), this HED of 8.1 mg/kg translates into 1–3 g/day oral dosing for an average 70 kg adult (21,22). In addition, the major route of elimination for NFV is through hepatic and biliary clearance which may result in significant liver accumulation on chronic use (23). In one of the clinical trials, an oral dose of 1500 mg (twice-a-day; 3 g/day) nelfinavir for 12 month period demonstrated partial remission of liposarcoma along with adverse effects including diarrhea and infections (24). Altogether, to harness the potential clinical use of NFV as an anticancer agent, a suitable drug delivery system facilitating enhanced efficacy and dose reduction is required.

Nanoparticulate drug delivery systems have been reported for their capability to encapsulate higher amounts of drugs and to provide selective therapeutic activity with less side-effects (25,26). In addition, several recent studies have reported their capability in (i) accomplishing stable formulations (27), (ii) enhancing drug efficiency (28) and (iii) applicability in biotechnology (29). Incorporating NFV into a nanoparticulate system will potentially reduce the required dose to exhibit anti-cancer efficacy. Nanoparticulate drug delivery systems such as polymeric nanoparticle carrier systems can enhance specificity, tolerability and drug efficacy (30). Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles have been used regularly due to their versatility and biocompatibility in encapsulation of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs (31). Nanoparticles act as efficient carriers for delivering drug to the tumor while demonstrating higher cellular uptake and tissue penetration; thus exhibiting tumor targeting potential (32,33). This study helps in understanding and exploring the growth inhibiting effects of NFV-loaded nanoparticulate systems while studying the mechanism of action to modulate cell death pathways; and provides a rationale to further evaluate nelfinavir as an anticancer agent following nanotechnology-based drug repositioning. We hypothesize that the NFV-loaded NPs are capable of exhibiting superior anti-cancer efficacy compared to plain drug at lower doses with efficient tumor targeting potential.

In this study, we aim to encapsulate poorly soluble drug nelfinavir into biodegradable polymer (PLGA) based nanoparticles through double emulsification technique using ultra-probe sonication and explore the anti-cancer efficacy of the developed drug-loaded NPs in NSCLC through several in-vitro and ex-vivo studies.

Materials

Poly (lactic-co-glycolic) (PLGA 50:50, 7-17 kDa, acid terminated), poly vinyl alcohol (PVA), and nelfinavir (NFV) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). A549, H4006 and H460 NSCLC cell lines were obtained from ATCC and maintained in RPMI-1640 medium (Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Atlanta Biologicals, Minneapolis, MN, USA), sodium pyruvate, penicillin-streptomycin (Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA) at 5% CO2/37°C. Healthy non-cancerous porcine kidney proximal tubule cell line LLC-PK1 was obtained from Dr. Yong Yu (St. John’s university, NY, USA) and maintained in BioWhittaker® Medium 199 (Lonza Walkersville, Inc., MD, USA) with 5% FBS and 10% penicillin-streptomycin. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), dichloromethane (DCM), dimethyl sulfoxide, coumarin-6, crystal violet dye, 16% paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution, and HPLC grade solvents including methanol, acetonitrile (ACN) and water were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Hampton, NH, USA). Molecular biology kits, supplies, and antibodies were purchased from other commercial vendors which are listed at appropriate places throughout the manuscript.

Methods

Development of UV Spectrophotometric Method for Nelfinavir Determination

A stock solution of 1 mg/ml concentration was prepared by dissolving nelfinavir in methanol. From the stock solution, standard solutions of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100 μg/ml were prepared by diluting with methanol. All the standard solutions were scanned using VWR UV-1600 PC Spectrophotometer (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) in the UV range 200–600 nm. In spectrum, NFV showed maximum absorbance at 253 nm. The calibration curve was constructed between concentration vs absorbance.

Formulation of Nelfinavir Nanoparticles (NFV NP)

NFV NPs were formulated through ultra-probe sonication by modifying a method reported earlier with slight modifications (34). Briefly, primary emulsion was prepared by ultra-probe sonication of polymer PLGA 502 RH (60 mg), NFV solution in DCM (5 mg/3 ml) with 0.5 ml of milliQ water for 2 min (10 Sec on-off cycle, 40% amplitude) (Qsonica-Q500, Qsonica, Newtown, CT, USA). Secondary emulsion was prepared by subjecting primary emulsion obtained in previous step with aqueous 1% w/v PVA solution in water for 4 min (10 Sec on-off cycle, 40% amplitude). The obtained emulsion was stirred overnight at room temperature for removal of organic solvents and were subsequently washed to remove excess PVA and unprocessed drug/polymer. NFV-loaded NPs were separated from the aqueous suspension medium by centrifugation at 1000×g (4°C for 3 min); and then washed twice with water through centrifugation 21,000×g for 15 min (4°C). Collected nanoparticles were re-dispersed in 1 ml of milliQ water and were further characterized.

Characterization of NFV NPs

Particle Size, Poly Dispersity Index (PDI) and Zeta Potential

Particle size, PDI and zeta potential were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). Formulations were diluted 100-fold with milli-Q water to obtain samples for measurement of size and zeta potential. The respective samples were loaded into the zeta cells (DTS 1070) and analyzed.

Drug Content

To determine encapsulated drug amount in nanoparticle formulation, a direct particle lysis approach was carried out. To 40 μL of formulation, 960 μL of methanol: ACN (45:55) was added followed by centrifugation for 45 min at 4°C at 21,000×g to lyse nanoparticles and to obtain loaded drug into the analyte sample. Clear supernatant was collected, analyzed for the drug content using UV spectroscopy as described earlier, and % EE/%DL was calculated using Eq. 1and Eq. 2 respectively.

In- vitro Drug Release Study

In-vitro drug release profile from NFV NPs was determined in phosphate buffered saline (PBS pH 7.4) with 1% polysorbate 80 for a period of 72 h. Briefly, 50 μl of nanoparticle formulation was dispersed in 950 μl of PBS with 1% polysorbate 80 (pH 7.4) in 2 mL microcentrifuge tubes. Tubes were placed in a shaker incubator at 37°C (200 rpm). At each specific time point (0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 48 and 72 h), the amount of drug released was determined by analyzing the collected supernatants by UV spectrophotometer at 253 nm after centrifuging the samples for 15 min at 17,500×g. Drug release testing was performed in triplicate and data obtained were represented as mean ± SD.

Morphological Analysis Using Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)

Imaging of NFV nanoparticles was performed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) utilizing our previously published protocols (35). Briefly, Formvar® carbon-coated copper grids 400-mesh (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA) were made hydrophilic using glow discharge plasma treatment for 60s. About 5 μL of diluted nanoparticles sample was added to the grid and allowed to adhere for 1 min. The samples were negatively stained by adding 5 μL of uranyl acetate (1%) and excess was removed by using Whatman filter paper after 30s. This process was repeated twice and the sample was finally allowed to air dry. The grids were then imaged using FEI Tecnai Spirit TWIN TEM (Hillsboro, OR, USA) operated at 120 kV voltage.

Atomic Force Microscopy Analysis (AFM)

The morphological characterization of AFA NP was performed using AFM. Imaging was carried out using the cantilever in air using Bruker Multimode AFM 8 (Bruker Nano Surfaces, Billerica, MA, USA). Briefly, nanoparticles were suspended in water and were drop-casted on to freshly cleaved mica surface and imaged with Scanasyst-Air probe in peak force mode.

Stability Studies

Stability of NFV NPs was evaluated while storing the samples at temperature of 4, 25 and 37°C for four weeks as reported previously (36). Samples were withdrawn after week 1, 2, 3 and 4; diluted with water (100-fold) and analyzed for particle size, PDI and zeta potential using Malvern Zeta Sizer. Entrapment efficiency was determined by lysing the samples as described above using UV spectrophotometer. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

Accelerated Stability Studies

Nanoparticles were kept at −80°C for 6 h to freeze and then placed in freeze dryer (FreeZone 6 Liter Benchtop Freeze Dry system, Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA) for at least 24 h. For this study, 5 mg of lyophilized NFV NP powder was stored in an isolated chamber at 40°C/75% relative humidity (RH). Samples were withdrawn on day 0, 7, 14, 21 and 28; and were analyzed for particle size, zeta potential and % entrapment efficiency.

In-Vitro Cellular Uptake Studies

Cellular uptake studies were performed using a protocol reported earlier (34). NPs for cellular uptake were formulated by replacing NFV with coumarin-6, a fluorescent dye, for easier tracking. In brief, A549 NSCLC cells were plated in tissue culture treated 8-chambered cover glass (Eppendorf, Hauppauge, NY, USA) at a seeding density of 10,000 cells/chamber followed by overnight incubation. Next day, cells were incubated with coumarin-6, or coumarin-6 loaded nanoparticles at 1 μg/mL concentration for 1 and 3 h. At each time interval (1 and 3 h), cells were washed with ice cold PBS twice and fixed with 4% PFA for 10 min. Fixed cells were washed again with ice cold PBS twice. Then, the chamber was removed and 20 μL of vectashield hardset mount with DAPI nuclear stain (H1500, Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) was placed on a glass slide dropwise followed by placing a cover glass. After overnight hardening of mounting medium through at 4°C, slide was imaged using EVOS-FL microscope with 20X objective (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

Cytotoxicity Studies

NFV NPs along with plain NFV were evaluated for their cytotoxicity in three different non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines: A549, H460 and H4006 as reported earlier with slight modifications (34,37). Briefly, cells were grown in FBS supplemented RPMI-1640 media as described in Materials section and were seeded in TC treated 96-well plates (Eppendorf, Hauppauge, NY, USA) at a seeding density of 2500 cells/well (7500 cells/cm2), incubated overnight for adherence at 37°C/5% CO2. Next day, treatments were prepared in the culture media at different NFV concentrations ranging from 0.39–50 μM and corresponding volumes of NFV NPs were calculated based on the drug entrapment efficiency. Blank culture media was added as control. After 72 h of incubation, % cell viability was determined by performing MTT assay as described earlier (37), by reading the absorbance of dissolved formazan crystals at 570 nm using a multi-modal plate-reader (Tecan Spark 10 M; Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland). Safety of NFV NP formulation was determined by evaluating the cytotoxicity of Blank NPs on healthy non-cancerous porcine kidney proximal tubule cell line (LLC-PK1). Briefly, cells were seeded into 96-well plates as described earlier and were incubated overnight followed by treatment with equivalent amounts of Blank NP corresponding to 5 and 10 μM of NFV NP for 24 and 72 h. % cell viabilities were determined through MTT assay as described earlier.

Scratch Assay

In-vitro scratch assay was used to study the cell migration. Briefly, scratches were created on a confluent cell monolayer. The cells on the edge of the scratch will migrate toward the center to close the scratch, thus establishing new cell-cell contacts. The assay was performed as previously reported (35,38). Briefly, A549 cells were plated in 24 well cell culture plates at a seeding density of 1 × 105 cells/well followed by overnight incubation. Next morning, scratches were made along the center of all wells with the help of a sterile p200 (200 μL) pipette tip. All the wells were washed with PBS twice and reference markings were drawn near the scratch area from the bottom side of the plate with a fine tip marker. Then scratch images were captured within the marked area using inverted microscope (Laxco, Mill Creek, WA, USA) with 10X magnification. Later treatments of control, NFV, NFV NP (7.5 μM) were added to the respective wells and incubated followed by imaging after 15, and 24 h. The images captured were analyzed quantitatively to assess the inhibitory effect of NFV and NFV-loaded nanoparticles on cell migration. Scratch width was measured from all wells using ImageJ software and % scratch closure was calculated further, considering reformation of cellular monolayer as 100% scratch closure.

Clonogenic Assay

Clonogenic assay is an in-vitro cell survival assay which is based on the single cell’s capability to grow into a colony (39). Using this assay, the effectiveness of the NFV and NFV NPs toward inhibition of colony formation was determined. The protocol reported previously (34,39) was modified and followed in this study. Briefly, A549 cells were seeded into 6-well cell culture plates at seeding density of 500 cells/well, and plates were kept for overnight incubation to allow time for cells to adhere. Next day, media was replaced, and cells were treated with NFV or NFV NPs (7.5 μM), or control for 48 h after which media was replaced with fresh culture medium on alternative days for 7 days. On 7th day, the colonies were stained with crystal violet. Briefly, the contents of the well were removed and washed with ice-cold PBS buffer twice followed by fixation with 4% PFA solution (in ice-cold PBS) for 10 min. Fixed cells were again washed with ice-cold PBS twice followed by staining with 0.01% (w/v) crystal violet solution with 1 h incubation. After staining, cells were washed with distilled water and images were captured using digital camera. Cell colonies were counted by colony counter software Open CFU (40).

3D Spheroid Cell Culture Study

An effective NSCLC therapy is not only determined by enhanced cellular uptake or cytotoxic potential, but also with the improved penetrability of nanoparticles into solid tumors (41,42). 3D spheroid cell culture studies are capable of mimicking the in-vivo features of tumors as reported in our previous studies (26). Briefly, 2000 cells per well were seeded in Corning® spheroid microplate (Corning, ME, USA) 96-well round bottom plates at a density of 2.0 × 103 cells/well and were incubated overnight at 37°C/5% CO2. Then cells allowed to grow further for 3 days and then all the wells were observed for spheroid formation with a rigid margin. Next day, media was replaced with either fresh media (control) or respective treatment solutions of NFV or NFV NP to achieve 5 and 10 μM in the wells. Spheroids were subjected to two kinds of dosing treatments i.e. a single dose and a multiple dose treatment. Briefly, both single and multiple dosing spheroids were treated with 10 μM and 20 μM concentrations of both NFV and NFV NP (to maintain original concentrations of 5 and 10 μM employed in the beginning), and images were captured. For single dosing, 100 μL of media was replaced with fresh media on further days of imaging. Images were captured using LAXCO LMI-6000 series inverted microscope (LAXCO, Mill Creek, WA, USA) on day 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 post treatment. In case of multiple dose study, spheroids were treated with corresponding concentrations of NFV or NFV NPs on respective days by replacing half of the medium (100 μL) from every well in a gentle manner to avoid bubble formation and aspiration of spheroid itself. For multiple dosing, wells were replenished with 5 and 10 μM concentrations of NFV, NFV NP or fresh media (control). Images were captured on day 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 days following treatment. Spheroid diameters were calculated using ImageJ software (Version 1.44) (National Institute of Health, USA) and further spheroid volumes were calculated.

Live-Dead Cell Assay

Live-dead cell assay was performed using Viability/Cytotoxicity Assay Kit for Animal Live & Dead Cells (Biotium, Fremont, CA, USA) on spheroids of day 15th with single and multiple dosing according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 100 μL of staining solution (2 μM calcein AM/4 μM Ethidium homodimer III (EthD-III)) was added to spheroids after complete removal of media from the respective wells. The plate was incubated for 45 min at room temperature. This provides green/red fluorescent staining of viable and dead cells, respectively. Images were captured using Cell Imaging Fluorescence Microscopy (EVOS-FL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Mean red fluorescence intensity (RF) and mean green fluorescence intensity (GF), signifying presence of dead and live cells in the core of spheroid mass were quantified using ImageJ software (National Institute of Health, USA).

CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay

CellTiter-Glo cell viability assay was performed using a commercially available kit (CellTiter-Glo®, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) on spheroids of day 15 given with single and multiple dosing according to manufacturer’s protocol. After imaging (20X magnification) the spheroids on day 15, 100 μL of medium was removed and replaced with 100 μL of CellTiter-Glo® reagent in each well. The contents were mixed for 2 min, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 min. The luminescence was measured using Spark 10 M plate reader (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland).

Mechanism of Action

Apoptosis: Caspase 3/7 Assay

Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, plays a critical role in assessing the potency of drug delivery systems. Caspase-3 is one of the major markers of apoptotic cell death, which can be activated in cells by both extrinsic and intrinsic pathways (43). Caspase-3 activity was measured using EnzChek™ Caspase-3 Assay Kit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) and assay was performed as per manufacturer’s specifications. Briefly, A549 cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 106 cells per tissue culture dish (100 mm diameter) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, NY, USA) and treated with NFV, NFV NP (7.5 μM) or control for 6 h followed by harvesting and washing of cell pellets. Cell lysis was carried out using 1X cell lysis buffer while subjecting to freeze-thaw cycle, followed by centrifugation at 5000 × rpm for 5 min. Supernatants obtained were then transferred to 96 well plate to which 50 μL of 2X substrate working solution (10 mM Z-DEVD-AMC substrate +2X reaction buffer) was added and incubated for 20 min. Fluorescence was measured at excitation/emission 360/460 nm (44).

Cell Apoptotic Analysis by Fluorescence Microplate Measurement

Annexin V FITC assay was performed using Annexin V FITC assay Kit (Cayman chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). This assay helps in assessing the ability of compounds or testing treatments to induce apoptosis (45). In brief, A549 cells were plated at density of 2.5 × 104 cells/well in Falcon, black walled clear bottom 96 well plate (Fisher scientific, Hampton, NH, USA) and were incubated overnight. Next day, media was replaced with NFV 10 μM, NFV NP 10 μM, Blank NP (equivalent volume for NFV NP) or drug-free control for 6 h. Then, plate was centrifuged for 5 min at 400×g at room temperature followed by aspiration of the supernatants and addition of 100 μl of 1X binding buffer to each well. Later, plate was centrifuged for 5 min at 400×g at room temperature followed by aspiration of the supernatants. To each well 50 μl of annexin V FITC/Propidium Iodide staining solution was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Then, plate was centrifuged for 5 min at 400×g at room temperature followed by aspiration of the supernatants and addition of 100 μl of 1X binding buffer to each well. Dead cells were stained by propidium iodide (Ex ~617 nm, Em ~535 nm; propidium iodide filter) and early stage apoptotic cells were stained by annexin V FITC. Fluorescence was measured by using filter designed to detect fluorescein ((Ex ~485 nm, Em ~535; Annexin V FITC).

Western Blot Studies

A549 cells were grown in a petri dish (100 mm diameter) at a density of 1.0 × 106 cells per TC dish (Thermo Scientific, Rochester, NY, USA) followed by overnight incubation. Next day, the cells were treated with either control or different concentrations (7.5 and 25 μM) of NFV and NFV NP formulation and incubated for 24 h. After 24 h of treatment, cells were harvested from petri dishes and centrifuged to obtain cell pellets. These were washed 3 times with PBS and lysed using 1% Triton® X-100 (BP151–500, Fisher Bio-Reagents, Hampton, NH, USA), 1% Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (PI78441, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in PBS followed by sonication for 60 min at 4°C. Lysed samples were centrifuged at 13,000×g at 4°C for 15 min and supernatants (lysates) were collected. Cell lysate protein was quantified by the DC™ Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Following protein normalization across all groups, samples were mixed with 2× Laemmli buffer (#161–0737, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and 2-mercaptoethanol, and denatured at 100°C for 10 min. For Western blot analysis, 25 μg of protein was loaded and separated on 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad Hercules, CA, USA) using a Bio-Rad PowerPac™ Basic Power Supply and transferred to Trans-Blot® Turbo™ Midi PVDF membranes (Bio-Rad Hercules, CA, USA) using a Bio-Rad Trans-Blot™ Turbo Transfer System. The membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in PBS for one hour on a shaker at room temperature, following which a 3% bovine serum albumin solution was added to the membranes and membranes were spiked with corresponding primary antibodies (1:500 dilution) and kept for shaking overnight at 4°C. The following proteins were studied: ATF-3 (18665S), Cleaved PARP-1(5625S), LC3B (3868S) and β-actin (84575S) (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA). β-actin was used as a control to make sure that loading of protein was uniform throughout the gel. All antibodies used were monoclonal and obtained from rabbit source. Membranes were then incubated with the corresponding goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) poly HRP secondary antibody (1:2000 dilution for ATF-3, Cleaved PARP-1 and LC3B; 1:10000 for β-actin) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PA, USA) for 1 h at room temperature and were subjected to Western Bright Chemiluminescence (WBF25, Gel Company Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA). Protein bands on the membranes were visualized using the Chemi mode by the Omega Lum™ G Imaging System (Gel Company Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA).

Data Analysis and Statistical Evaluation

All data were addressed as mean ± SD or SEM, with n = 3 unless otherwise mentioned. Three trials of cytotoxicity studies were performed for each control or treatment with n = 6 for each trial. All data were evaluated by unpaired student’s t test or one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, using GraphPad Prism software (Version 6.0 for Windows, GraphPad Software, CA, USA).

Results

Development of UV Spectrophotometric Method for Nelfinavir (NFV) Determination

The linear regression data for NFV absorbance calibration curve showed good linear relationship over the concentration range 10–100 μg/ml for NFV as represented in Fig. S1. Linear regression equation was found to be:

Characterization of NFV NPs

Particle Size, Polydispersity Index (PDI), Zeta Potential

Figure 1A represents the size distribution of NFV NP. As can be seen, most of the NPs in formulation fell in a very narrow size range, presented by a single peak on the histogram, which also represents a nearly monodispersed formulation (Fig. 1A). Nanoparticle formulation (NFV NP) was found to have a particle size, PDI and zeta potential of 191.9 ± 10.0 nm, 0.2 ± 0.1 and − 24.3 ± 0.9 mV respectively as represented in Fig. 1E. As reported earlier, size of the nanoparticles affects their rate of cellular internalization; lower the size, higher the cellular uptake. Also, PDI and surface charge play vital role in regard to product quality/stability (46,47). Hence, observed characteristics of NFV NP were found to elucidate a desirable formulation.

Drug Content

As shown in Table 1, NFV NP was found to have % EE and % DL of 30.07 ± 0.5% and 2.5 ± 0.04%. Concentration of entrapped NFV was found to be 1500.0 ± 10.5 μg/ml corresponding to 2.6 ± 0.1 mM of NFV in nanoparticle formulation as represented in Table 1. Hence, developed NFV NPs were found to possess significantly high drug loading capacity.

In-Vitro Release Studies

In-vitro release studies were performed to determine the drug release pattern from NFV NP in phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4, 37°C) mimicking physiological fluid environment. The NFV NP was found to exhibit a controlled release pattern with about half the drug (54.9 ± 2.4%) being released over a period of 72 h, with minimal burst release of 8.2 ± 0.5% (first 30 min) as shown in Fig. 1B. This reveals the ability of nanoparticles to release drug in sustained pattern after reaching physiological environment.

The release mechanism and kinetics were determined through application of various mathematical models: zero-order, first-order, Korsmeyer-Peppas model and Higuchi model. The representative release plots can be found in Fig. S2. Release equations were obtained by fitting the data to each model. The equations and correlation co-efficient values for zero-order, first-order, Korsmeyer-Peppas model and Higuchi model release kinetics were found to be y = 0.009x + 0.171, R2 = 0.6385; y = 0.021x + 1.59, R2 = 0.9042; y = 0.425x-0.911, R2 = 0.9582; and y = 0.076x + 0.213, R2 = 0.8956 respectively (Table 1). Hence, Korsmeyer-Peppas model was observed as the best-fitting model for drug release from NFV NPs based on the highest R2 value. Diffusional constant (n) obtained from Korsmeyer-Peppas equation allows a better understanding of the drug transport mechanism. n value was found to be 0.3, suggesting that the release of NFV from NPs is controlled by Fickian diffusion (n = <0.45) (48).

Morphological Analysis Using Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)

A representative TEM image presented in Fig. 1C indicates that the nanoparticles had uniform spherical shape with a smooth surface. As anticipated based on zeta potential measurement, no aggregation of nanoparticles was observed during TEM analysis. This reveals the uniform dispersion of nanoparticles in the formulation and the results are in agreement with PDI and zeta potential measurements.

Atomic Force Microscopy Analysis (AFM)

Particle size of the nanoparticles was determined by atomic force microscopy and the respective image was represented in Fig. 1D. As AFM allows for three-dimensional projection of sample, images from an AFM represent data in three dimensions whereas TEM images are only two-dimensional. Moreover, AFM analysis consisted of direct height measurement of individual nanoparticles which is not possible from TEM analysis (49). Results from the AFM correspond to the distribution acquired from DLS measurements and also narrow size distribution of NFV-NP has been confirmed as seen in Fig. 1D.

Accelerated Stability Studies

Nanoparticles are required to be evaluated for their thermal stability and sensitivity to moisture as these environmental conditions may result in compromised formulation quality. During accelerated stability testing, the rate of degradation is accelerated under stressful conditions such as high temperature and humidity where samples are evaluated for their physicochemical characteristics (50,51). Recommended accelerated storage conditions as per International council for harmonization of technical requirements for pharmaceuticals for human use (ICH) guidelines include 40° ± 2°C/75 ± 5% RH have been employed in the current study (50). As shown in Fig. 2; physical characterization studies (particle size, zeta potential: Figs. 2A&B) and percentage of drug remaining (Fig. 2C) in samples withdrawn every week for a 1-month study, revealed high stability of NFV NP under accelerated stability conditions. In brief, even after storing for four weeks at accelerated conditions of temperature and humidity, there were no major changes observed in particle size, zeta potential or the drug content (particle size: 277.3 ± 2.6 nm, −18.5 ± 3.6 mV, and 31.4 ± 0.8%) compared to their respective values (particle size: 270.5 ± 0.0 nm, −20.1 ± 0.0 mV, 30.1 ± 0.5%) at the initial time point. From the observed results, it can be interpreted that the negative surface charge (about -20 mV) of NFV NP is hindering the aggregation/coalescence of particles, hence no detrimental effect on particle size or drug entrapment was observed.

Stability Studies

Stability is a major concern while dealing with nano-sized drug delivery systems due to emulsion instability and particle aggregation (36). In addition to accelerated stability studies, regular stability studies were also performed. As shown in Fig. S3, stability analysis data revealed similar results that NFV NP formulation was stable with no significant changes in particle size (Fig. S3A), zeta potential (Fig. S3B) and entrapment efficiency (Fig. S3C) for up to 4 weeks of storage.

In-Vitro Cellular Uptake Studies

Figure 3 represents intracellular uptake of nanoparticle formulations using A549 NSCLC cells. Based on our recently published studies (35), fluorescent dye (Coumarin-6) loaded polymeric nanoparticles were formulated and utilized in the current study thus making it possible to visualize the uptake and accumulation, and to evaluate in-vitro cellular uptake. Fluorescent images taken following 1- and 3-h incubation with coumarin loaded nanoparticles clearly demonstrated significant internalization compared to plain coumarin in A549 cancer cells even after 1 h incubation period (Fig. 3). Hence encapsulation of coumarin/drug into PLGA nanoparticles enabled interaction of nanoparticles with cell surfaces, further resulting in efficient cellular internalization. It can be assumed that higher cellular uptake of drug loaded NPs will ultimately lead to higher intracellular accumulation of nelfinavir, and sustained release of drug inside the cells, thus resulting in sustained and higher anticancer activity as compared to plain nelfinavir. This observation comes in accordance with previously published studies reporting higher cellular uptake of drug loaded PLGA nanoparticles in A549 cells (34).

Cytotoxicity Studies

Anti-cancer cell viability studies were performed using MTT assay to evaluate the cytotoxic potential of NFV-loaded NPs versus plain drug. From this study, it was revealed that NFV cytotoxicity against NSCLC cell lines was significantly enhanced by nanoparticle encapsulation. Similar trend was found in all three NSCLC cell lines: A549, H4006 and H460. Figure 4 illustrates the cytotoxic effects of NFV and NFV NP in all three NSCLC cell lines. The IC50 values for plain NFV and NFV NP were found to be 18.1 ± 2.6 μM, and 8.3 ± 0.4 μM in A549 cell line; 24.3 ± 7.5 μM, and 5.0 ± 2.6 μM in H4006 cell line; 20.3 ± 9.7 μM, and 4.0 ± 2.6 μM in H460 cell line respectively (Fig. 4D). Smaller and consistent particle size of NFV NP facilitates efficient internalization of nanoparticles resulting in more accumulation of nanoparticles inside the cells, thus leading to higher cytotoxic potential at the same dose. As can be seen from Figs. 4A-D, it was observed that IC50 value of NFV against A549, H4006 and H460 cells was lower in case of NFV NPs compared to plain NFV which reflects improved anti-proliferative activity of NFV in three cell lines. This could be attributed to what was reported before in literature that; although free drug enters the cells by passive diffusion, nanoparticles could be internalized by endocytosis (52,53). This mechanism of internalization could also occur in tumor cells, resulting in higher intracellular NFV concentration with nanoparticles as compared to plain drug (52). In-vitro studies to establish safety of optimized nanoformulation were performed on porcine kidney epithelial cell line LLC-PK1. When LLC-PK1 cell line was treated with blank drug-free NFV NP equivalent nanoformulation equivalent to 5 and 10 μM NFV for 24 and 72 h, cell viability of >90% following both 24- and 72-h treatment at both concentrations suggested that optimized NFV NP was not toxic to LLC-PK1 cells, a normal noncancerous cell line. The safety profile of nanoparticles has been presented in Fig. 4E. These observations were expected since the prepared materials and nanoparticles were basically nontoxic, highly biocompatible and safe. That comes in alignment with published data of cytotoxicity studies of PLGA loaded drugs on same studied cell lines (26,34). While testing the drug-loaded formulation on normal cells may provide valuable information in terms of safety, nelfinavir being a repurposed drug has no known cytotoxicity in normal cells. As several studies have tested nelfinavir for potential cytotoxicity in a variety of normal cells including primary breast epithelial cells (54), mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) (55), and bone marrow cells (56) for 24–72 h at concentrations up to 20 μM; and did not report any significant cytotoxicity (>80–90% cell viability), drug-loaded formulation was not tested on normal cells. Nelfinavir demonstrates anti-cancer efficacy by inducing apoptosis, promoting oxidative stress (18), and by inhibiting Akt in dysfunctional (phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase) PI3K/Akt/mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) pathway (57); all of which are well controlled in normal cells. Thus, it is well-established that nelfinavir is unlikely to show any significant cytotoxicity in normal cells and tissues.

Scratch Assay

Scratch assay is a well-established method to access cell-cell interaction, and cellular migration (38). In this method, a scratch is drawn manually on a confluent layer of cells, and the potency of drug/formulations to inhibit cellular migration in the scratched area is analyzed as a function of % scratch closure with respect to time. For these experiments, a scratch was made as described earlier, cells were treated with NFV or NFV NP or fresh media (control), and images of scratched area were taken at respective time points. Representative images for the experiment are shown in Fig. 5A at 0, 15 and 24 h following treatment in A549 cells. After 24 h, % scratch closure was found to be 96.8 ± 1.3, 97.1% ± 0.7, and 53.5 ± 20.9% for control, NFV 7.5 μM and NFV NP 7.50 μM respectively in case of A549 (Fig. 5B). At an earlier time-point of 15 h, NFV NPs showed significantly better efficacy in inhibiting cellular migration with plain NFV showing no efficacy (NFV 7.5 μM vs NFV NP 7.5 μM - p < 0.05; and 24 h: NFV 7.5 μM vs NFV NP 7.5 μM – p < 0.05). From Figs. 5A & 5B, it can be understood that scratches treated with control and NFV show migration of cells and those treated with NFV NP showed significant inhibition of cellular migration or scratch closure. This indicates the efficacy of NFV NP with enhanced anti-migratory effects, thus reducing the tumor metastasis probability.

Clonogenic Assay

Clonogenic assay is an in-vitro cell survival assay used to determine the colony formation capability of single cancer cells (58). NFV and NFV NP were evaluated for their long-term efficacy using clonogenic assay in NSCLC cell line (A549). From the representative images shown in Fig. 6A, it can be illustrated that colony growth was significantly inhibited by NFV NP compared to NFV and drug-free media control, in A549 cell lines. After 48-h treatment period and 7-day incubation, % of colonies survived after treatment with 7.5 μM NFV or NFV NP were 53.7 ± 8.4%, 27.8 ± 1.4% (A549; Fig. 6B, p < 0.05) respectively, considering number of colonies to be 100% in drug free treatment control wells. The data suggest higher efficacy against cancer colony formation with NFV-loaded NPs as compared to plain NFV. This data may be considered a representative of NFV NP’s efficacy in eliminating the possibility of tumor relapse, from single cancer cells left behind following chemotherapy and surgical intervention; and can well be linked to enhanced intracellular (and intratumoral) drug accumulation with nanoparticle formulation.

3D Spheroid Cell Culture Study

As described in Methods section, 3D spheroid cell culture study was designed to better predict the physiological interaction of NFV-loaded NPs with tumors. As known, A549 NSCLC cell line is able to form well-structured spheroid masses (26,59). For this study, A549 spheroids were grown for 3 days before incubating with treatments. 3D spheroid models combine the ability to mimic the 3D structure of malignant tissue in-vitro in addition to being relevant to cancer microenvironment to which the tumor cells are exposed to (60,61). A 3D in-vitro model was developed successfully by using ultra-low attachment spheroid plates as reported by Vaidya et al (26) so that under favorable incubation conditions, cells are promoted to form a spheroid mass.

In the current study, cells were allowed to form tight cellular masses for a period of 3 days, as would be the case with late diagnosis of a well-established tumor. After tumor formation, spheroids were treated by either a single dose (one dose in the beginning) or a multiple dose (dosing every 3rd day, mimicking chemotherapy treatments). Images were captured using inverted microscope (Laxco, Mill Creek, WA, USA) on respective days and were analyzed using the ImageJ software Version 1.44 (National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

Representative spheroid images on day 0 (day of treatment), 6, 12 and 15 are represented in Fig. S4 (single dosing) and Fig. S5 (multiple dosing), with spheroids’ volume quantification presented in Fig. 7. Spheroids were found to achieve a diameter and spheroid volume of 1999.4 ± 109.3 μm and 4.3 ± 0.6 mm3 after 3 days of culture i.e. day 0 for the treatments. After 15 days of treatment, A549 spheroids of single dose study had spheroid volumes of 7.1 ± 1.2 mm3 (Control), 5.0 ± 0.8 mm3 (NFV 10 μM), 4.7 ± 1.4 mm3 (NFV NP 10 μM), 5.5 ± 1.9 mm3 (NFV 5 μM), and 5.5 ± 0.8 mm3 (NFV NP 5 μM) respectively, representing ≈30% (NFV) and ≈34% (NFV NP) reduction in tumor volume as compared to control (Fig. 7A). While looking at other time-points, NFV NP (10 μM) demonstrated a significant reduction in tumor volume of ≈52% as compared to plain NFV (≈14%) (Day 9: 5 μM: NFV vs NFV NP p < 0.0001, Control vs NFV NP p < 0.01; Day 15: 5 μM: Control vs NFV NP p < 0.01) (Fig. 7A: Single dose; Table 2). In case of multiple dosing, after 15 days of treatment, A549 spheroids of single dose study had spheroid diameters and volumes of 2314.2 ± 90.1 μm and 6.5 ± 0.8 mm3 (Control), 2027.8 ± 157.1 μm and 4.4 ± 0.9 mm3 (NFV 10 μM), 1654.4 ± 275.9 μm and 2.5 ± 1.4 mm3 (NFV NP 10 μM), 2032.7 ± 147.1 μm and 4.4 ± 0.9 mm3 (NFV 5 μM), 2045.5 ± 147.6 μm and 4.5 ± 0.9 mm3 (NFV NP 5 μM) respectively, thus demonstrating significant growth inhibition as compared to both drug free treatment and plain NFV (Day 12: 10 μM: NFV vs NFV NP p < 0.01,Control vs NFV NP p < 0.001; Day 15: 10 μM: Control vs NFV NP p < 0.0001) (Fig. 7B: Multiple dose; Table 2). Multiple dosing (every 3rd day treatment) also resulted in significant spheroid growth inhibition after NFV NP treatment compared to NFV. Graphs representing spheroid volume comparisons after single and multiple dosing can be found in Figs. 7A&B respectively. Calculated spheroid volumes for both single and multiple dosing experiments are presented in Table 2 as well.

From the observed efficacy in both spheroid models, it was confirmed that treatment with NFV NP resulted in a significant difference in spheroid volumes as compared to NFV and control treated groups. Tumor growth suppression was continually observed until the end of the treatment.

Live-Dead Cell Assay

A live-dead cell assay is an extension of 3D-spheroid cell culture study. Studies mentioned in the previous section take into account the physical appearance of spheroids and determine effectiveness of therapy based on reduction in spheroid diameter and volumes. However, this approach may not reveal the full picture of therapy as there may be dead cells within spheroid masses, which cannot be visualized. So, to understand the therapy better, it is essential to evaluate % alive and dead cells within spheroid masses. For this purpose, a live-dead cell assay was adopted which involves two dyes which stain live cells green and dead cells red. A higher red cell fluorescence/green cell fluorescence intensity (RF/GF; Dead:Live cells ratio) ratio indicates better therapy. Live-dead cell assay images are represented in Fig. 8 (A. Single dose, B. Multiple Dose). The results obtained in this assay aligned with the visual assessment done in the previous section with NFV NP having this highest RF/GF ratio as compared to plain NFV and control spheroids (Figs. 9A & 9B). After assessing the spheroids of single dose study, it was found that there was no statistical difference between NFV and NFV NP in overall efficacy to cause tumor cell death as can be seen in Fig. 9A. This could be attributed to the dosing strategy as the spheroids are given with only single dose. Due to the complexity of three-dimensional spheroid mass, a multiple dosing strategy is essential. However, red fluorescence intensity observations (representing dead cell population) among different treatments revealed that NFV NP (10 μM) treated spheroids exhibited higher values compared to that of control and NFV (Data not shown). RF/GF ratios were found to be 100.0 ± 5.6 in untreated control spheroids and 86.8 ± 7 for 5 μM NFV whereas 5 μM of NFV NP had a RF/GF ratio of 172.0 ± 12.8 (2-fold difference). On the other hand, 10 μM NFV had a ratio of 97.4 ± 4.6 whereas 10 μM of NFV NP showed a 2.8-fold difference with a RF/GF ratio of 274.8 ± 24.3 (Fig. 9B). It can be inferred from the results that NFV NPs have has better spheroid penetration and effect as compared to plain NFV at the same dose.

CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay

A cell titer-glo 3D cell viability assay further cements the results obtained with visual assessment and live-dead cell assays by measuring % viable cells with respect to the control. It can be seen in Figs. 9C (single dose) & 9D (multiple dose) that NFV NP treatment significantly reduced viable cells within spheroid masses as compared to NFV treated spheroids. For a single dose of 5 μM NFV, spheroids showed a viability of 113.3 ± 1.5% whereas at the same concentration and treatment conditions, NFV NP treated spheroids showed 95.7 ± 2.3% viability (no treatment control being 100% viability). On the other hand, after multiple dosing of 5 μM NFV over 15 days, spheroids showed a viability of 107.8 ± 5.0% and 84.0 ± 4.0% viability was observed for NFV NP treated spheroids under similar dosing conditions. These results re-establish the fact that NFV NPs are more efficacious than NFV in inhibiting 3D-spheroid growth over prolonged exposure of 15 days.

Mechanism of Action

Caspase-3 Assay

Members of the caspase family of proteases have been reported to be crucial mediators associated with apoptosis (62). The EnzChek® Caspase-3 Assay Kit allows the detection of apoptosis by assaying for increases in caspase-3 and other DEVD-specific protease activities (e.g., caspase-7). As seen in Fig. 10A, increased caspase-3 activity was observed in A549 cells with nanoparticle treatment compared to control (p < 0.01). % fluorescence intensity measurements – normalized to control were found to be 100.0 ± 0.0% (Control), 128.6 ± 14.4% (NFV 7.5 μM), and 157.3 ± 24.0% (NFV NP 7.5 μM) (p < 0.01) as seen in Fig. 10A.

Cellular Apoptotic Analysis by Fluorescence Microplate Measurement

Untreated, NFV, NFV NP and Blank NP treated A549 cells were stained with Annexin-V/FITC and propidium iodide (PI) followed by fluorescence measurements for detecting early stage apoptotic cells. A significant increase in the fluorescence intensity pertaining to enhanced early apoptotic cell population was observed in NFV NP treated groups, at both 3 and 7.5 μM (Fig. 10B). Relative fluorescence intensities observed (normalized to control) after respective treatments were found to be as follows, control: 1.0 ± 0.1; Blank NP (Equivalent to 3 μM): 1.2 ± 0.1; NFV 3 μM: 1.2 ± 0.2; NFV NP 3 μM: 7.3 ± 0.6; Blank NP (Equivalent to 7.5 μM): 1.13 ± 0.1, NFV 7.5 μM: 0.9 ± 0.0 and NFV NP 7.5 μM: 14.8 ± 0.9. These results indicate that there is a significant induction of apoptosis in NFV NP treated cells as compared to NFV or control (Control vs NFV NP, 3 μM: p < 0.0001; NFV vs NFV NP, 3 μM: p < 0.0001; Control vs NFV NP, 7.5 μM: p < 0.0001 and NFV vs NFV NP, 7.5 μM: p < 0.0001). These results also indicate that apoptosis-induction capability of NFV may be caspase-3 independent, and more dependent on phosphatidylserine externalization (63).

Western Blot Studies

NFV, originally intended as an antiviral drug, has been reported to induce ER stress markers like ATF3. ATF 3 has also been reported to play a major role in maintaining normalcy in many cancers (64,65). Another major mechanism for cancer survival is autophagy, wherein cells recycle their components to generate ATP and sustain stressful conditions encountered during cancer proliferation. It has been reported that inhibition of autophagy is followed by an induction of apoptosis which further leads to cell death (7,16). Considering all these factors, in the current study, expression levels of ATF 3, cleaved PARP-1 (apoptosis marker) and LC3B (autophagy marker) have been assessed in A549 cells, following NFV or NFV-NP treatment. Representative blots for ATF3, cleaved PARP and LC3B proteins can be found in Fig. 10C. As shown, NFV-NP upregulated the levels of ATF3, cleaved PARP and LC3BII after 24 h’ treatments, indicating induction of ER stress and apoptosis; and autophagy inhibition (LC3BII). Thus, a potential mechanism of cancer growth inhibition and cellular necrosis for NFV may be autophagy inhibition or apoptosis induction which can be supplemental to the induction of ER stress biomarker ATF3.

Discussion

The need for an accelerated drug development process to identify efficient cancer therapeutics is increasing rapidly (66). As drug repositioning provides an expedited drug development process and identifies potential new uses of old drugs, it has been growing in the past years (2). Hypoglycemic agents like metformin, rosiglitazone; and immunosuppressants like rapamycin are under investigation as anti-cancer therapeutics. Protease inhibitors, a class of antiviral drugs, have been under investigation for repositioning them as anti-cancer therapeutics (16). In 2019, Rengan et al reported that nelfinavir enhances the efficacy of standard chemoradiotherapy in NSCLC (67). In another study, Xiang et al reported repositioning ability of NFV as a cervical cancer therapy (18). However, due to the requirement of higher doses (about 1500 mg twice daily), it lacks clinical relevance and interest. It is necessary to develop an efficient delivery system to target the disease and consequently lowering the dose (24). Moreover, NFV is a BCS class IV drug (Biopharmaceutical Classification System) with low aqueous solubility and low permeability, underlining the need of an optimal delivery system. Polymeric nanocarriers, well-known carrier systems capable of delivering both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs, have been chosen in current study (68). Several research studies have been reported highlighting the significance of nanoparticles in targeting tumors through delivering therapeutics including several from our own research group (26,33). Khan et al developed curcumin-loaded PLGA NPs and reported improved anti-cancer efficacy of curcumin (69). As of now, there are no studies reporting the efficacy of NFV-loaded drug delivery systems in NSCLC. Hence, in the present study, an attempt was made to develop nanotechnology-based systems for repurposing NFV, by using PLGA as polymer and to explore their anti-cancer efficacy. NFV was included in the organic phase while formulating NPs due to its hydrophobic nature (70). Developed NPs were found to load higher amounts of NFV (about 1500 ± 0.0 μg/ml) indicating its successful encapsulation. Physicochemical characteristics of NFV NPs such as particle size revealed the NFV NPs presented a nano-sized carrier system which attributed to their efficient cellular uptake, confirmed by intracellular uptake in A549 cells (Figs. 1 & 3). Polydispersity index of NFV NP indicated uniform particle size distribution which is in agreement with morphological analysis performed through TEM and AFM analysis. Higher negative zeta potential value of NFV NP assisted in preventing the likelihood of NP aggregation, often possible due to smaller size of NPs (71). Stability studies performed at accelerated conditions and at different storage temperatures revealed that there were no major changes observed in the particle characteristics even after storage at either ASA or different temperature conditions for one-month period. When stability studies were performed to determine stability of NFV nanoparticles at different temperatures, it was found that there was no significant difference in particle size, zeta potential and drug entrapment over 4 weeks indicating formulation integrity as seen in Figs. 2 and S3. Stability of the formulated NFV NP can be referred to the higher surface charge of particles as hypothesized to inhibit aggregation (72,73).

Determination of drug release pattern from nanoparticles is very important to understand their in-vivo behavior. Korsmeyer-Peppas model put forth a simple relationship which describes the drug release pattern from a polymeric system (74). Developed NFV NPs were found to exhibit sustained release of the drug, following Korsmeyer-Peppas model and Fickian diffusion from polymeric nanoparticles (Fig. S2). Fickian model indicates that drug release from the polymeric matrices is governed by diffusion where the diffusion or transport rate of solvent is greater than the polymeric chain relaxation (75).

Due to efficient intracellular uptake, NFV NPs demonstrated greater cytotoxicity in immortalized NSCLC cell lines, thus underlining importance of encapsulating NFV into NPs (76). Extensive in-vitro cell culture studies were carried out to investigate the efficacy of NFV NP against NSCLC. A significant reduction in IC50 values was observed for NFV after encapsulating into nanoparticles as seen in Fig. 4. Generally, cell migration is an important characteristic of any cancer which involves movement of cells from one location to another, associated with cancer metastasis (77,78). Cell migration is also essential for many physiological processes such as neoangiogenesis and tumor invasion (79). Hence, it is essential to understand the behavior of migrating cells through proper in-vitro assays as reported by Pijuan et al. (80). Results from the scratch assay seen in Fig. 5 revealed that NFV nanoparticles had greater ability to inhibit cell migration compared to NFV hence revealing their ability to inhibit metastasis. Results from clonogenic assay study as seen in Fig. 6 revealed that NFV NPs can inhibit the ability of single cells to form colonies. Hence, it ensures the effectiveness of NFV NP on long term basis while preventing tumor recurrence.

Development of 3D in-vitro models is of utmost necessity to mimic in-vivo solid tumor conditions which could be achieved by using specific low attachment spheroid plates as reported by Vaidya et al (26). These models facilitate self-assembly of cancer cells into spheroid masses with different proliferation areas and cellular behavior which cannot be replicated using 2D systems. All these features of 3D in-vitro models present them as more realistic models as reported by Amaral et al. and Bresciani et al. (81,82). From results seen in Figs. 7-9, it can be understood that nanoparticles were able to deliver the drug to spheroids’ core efficiently in both single and multiple dose study ensuring their clinical use. In addition, live dead cell assay results confirmed ability of NFV NP (multiple dosing) to penetrate through solid mass of spheroids leading to the higher RF/GF even at both 5 and 10 μM concentrations compared to NFV. % cell viability results on day 15th of spheroid study revealed the same supporting the observations of live-dead spheroid assay.

Apoptosis is often referred to as programmed cell death mechanism, with many pathways playing key roles in the process. One of the major contributors to apoptotic process are caspases (cysteine-aspartic protease enzyme), responsible for proteolysis. Caspase-3, also known as one of the executioner caspases, gets activated in presence of death inducing stimuli (7,83). From the results, it was observed that NFV NP treatment induced caspase-3 levels, although not significantly as compared to plain NFV, demonstrating their ability to induce cell death through apoptosis as seen in Fig. 10. In addition, annexin-V based apoptotic assays were performed which revealed the ability of NFV NP to actuate apoptosis. Annexin V acts a sensitive probe due to its high affinity towards phosphatidylserine present on the apoptotic cell plasma membrane (84,85). NFV NP treated cells have exhibited significantly higher apoptosis at both 5 and 10 μM. These results correlate with the potential of NFV NP in inducing apoptosis through activation of caspase levels in the treated A549 cells. Overall, these results are confirming the role of apoptosis in inhibitory effect of NFV NPs’ on cellular growth and proliferation.

Extensive ER stress induction and autophagy inhibition can cause non-apoptotic cell death (16). At increased intensity or duration of cellular stress, these pathways has been reported to activate cell death mechanisms (86). Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), activated in response to ER stress acts as biomarker to assess the potentiality of treatments in cancers (16,87). Ubiquitin-like conjugation system such as microtubule-associated protein light chain 3B-II (LC3B-II) perform the key processes in each phase of autophagy (7). LC3B-II is a quantitative marker of autophagy since it is required for the formation of autophagosomes and its level is proportional to the amount of autophagosomes in the cells (88). From the western blots of A549 cells following NFV/NFV-NP treatment, an upregulation of LC3B protein levels was observed. Apoptosis was also evaluated by assaying for cleaved PARP, a general marker of apoptosis (89). Immunoblotting analysis demonstrated the dramatic increase in the levels of ATF3 and cleaved fragments of PARP (Fig. 10), indicating induction of apoptosis which can be correlated with the enhanced early apoptotic cells observed from annexin V/FITC apoptosis assay.

Nanotechnology-based repositioning of antiviral drug, nelfinavir could be a promising approach to target NSCLC, beneficial with an efficient nanoparticulate system as a carrier. Developed NFV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles were found to be exerting superior anti-cancer efficacy compared to plain drug against NSCLC. Taken together, results from the current study including in-vitro cell culture studies as well as 3D spheroid models illustrate their pronounced efficiency in NSCLC treatment after encapsulating NFV into a nanoparticulate system.

Conclusion

With the present investigations, it can be concluded that NFV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles were successfully formulated using double-emulsification technique and were evaluated as a potential treatment for NCSLC. Compared to NFV alone, NFV NPs exhibited higher cytotoxicity, enhanced inhibitory effect on migration and colony growth. In addition, cellular uptake studies and 3D spheroid studies; assays exhibiting capability of NFV nanoparticles in induction of ER stress, apoptosis and inhibition of autophagy process are promising them as a potential treatment strategy for NSCLC. While the preliminary results are promising, its pre-clinical and clinical evaluation could be expedited to emphasize the drug repositioning of NFV to treat NSCLC.

Abbreviations

DAPI:

4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole

4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole

DCM:

Dichloromethane

Dichloromethane

%EE:

Encapsulation efficiency

Encapsulation efficiency

FBS:

Fetal bovine serum

Fetal bovine serum

IC50 :

50% inhibition concentration

50% inhibition concentration

ICH:

International council for harmonization of technical requirements for pharmaceuticals for human use

International council for harmonization of technical requirements for pharmaceuticals for human use

MTT:

3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide

3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide

NFV:

Nelfinavir

Nelfinavir

NFV NPs:

NFV loaded PLGA nanoparticles

NFV loaded PLGA nanoparticles

NSCLC:

Non-small-cell lung cancer

Non-small-cell lung cancer

PBS:

Phosphate-buffered saline

Phosphate-buffered saline

PDI:

Polydispersity index

Polydispersity index

PLGA:

Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)

Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)

PS:

Particle size

Particle size

PVA:

Poly (vinyl alcohol)

Poly (vinyl alcohol)

RH:

Relative humidity

Relative humidity

TEM:

Transmission electron microscopy

Transmission electron microscopy

References

Zappa C, Mousa SA. Non-small cell lung cancer: current treatment and future advances. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Jun;5(3):288–300.

Zappa C, Mousa SA. Non-small cell lung cancer: current treatment and future advances. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Jun;5(3):288–300.

Parvathaneni V, Kulkarni NS, Muth A, Gupta V. Drug repurposing: a promising tool to accelerate the drug discovery process. Drug Discov Today. 2019 Oct;24(10):2076–85.

Parvathaneni V, Kulkarni NS, Muth A, Gupta V. Drug repurposing: a promising tool to accelerate the drug discovery process. Drug Discov Today. 2019 Oct;24(10):2076–85.

Gong H, Liu F, Liu X, Min S, Wu N, Liu Xet al. APPBP2 enhances non-small cell lung cancer proliferation and invasiveness through regulating PPM1D and SPOP. EBioMedicine. 2019 May 16;44:138–149.

Gong H, Liu F, Liu X, Min S, Wu N, Liu Xet al. APPBP2 enhances non-small cell lung cancer proliferation and invasiveness through regulating PPM1D and SPOP. EBioMedicine. 2019 May 16;44:138–149.

Yang Y, Ikezoe T, Nishioka C, Bandobashi K, Takeuchi T, Adachi Y, et al. NFV, an HIV-1 protease inhibitor, induces growth arrest, reduced Akt signalling, apoptosis and docetaxel sensitisation in NSCLC cell lines. Br J Cancer. 2006 Dec 18;95(12):1653–62.

Yang Y, Ikezoe T, Nishioka C, Bandobashi K, Takeuchi T, Adachi Y, et al. NFV, an HIV-1 protease inhibitor, induces growth arrest, reduced Akt signalling, apoptosis and docetaxel sensitisation in NSCLC cell lines. Br J Cancer. 2006 Dec 18;95(12):1653–62.

Yadav RK, Chae S-W, Kim H-R, Chae HJ. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and cancer. J Cancer Prev. 2014 Jun;19(2):75–88.

Yadav RK, Chae S-W, Kim H-R, Chae HJ. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and cancer. J Cancer Prev. 2014 Jun;19(2):75–88.

Gills JJ, LoPiccolo J, Dennis PA. Nelfinavir, a new anti-cancer drug with pleiotropic effects and many paths to autophagy. Autophagy. 2008 Jan 1;4(1):107–9.

Gills JJ, LoPiccolo J, Dennis PA. Nelfinavir, a new anti-cancer drug with pleiotropic effects and many paths to autophagy. Autophagy. 2008 Jan 1;4(1):107–9.

Liu G, Pei F, Yang F, Li L, Amin AD, Liu S, et al. Role of autophagy and apoptosis in non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Feb;10:18(2).

Liu G, Pei F, Yang F, Li L, Amin AD, Liu S, et al. Role of autophagy and apoptosis in non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Feb;10:18(2).

Chen Q, Kang J, Fu C. The independence of and associations among apoptosis, autophagy, and necrosis. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2018 Jul 1;3(1):1–11.

Chen Q, Kang J, Fu C. The independence of and associations among apoptosis, autophagy, and necrosis. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2018 Jul 1;3(1):1–11.

Su M, Mei Y, Sinha S. Role of the crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis in cancer. J Oncol. 2013;2013:e102735.

Su M, Mei Y, Sinha S. Role of the crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis in cancer. J Oncol. 2013;2013:e102735.

Torian L. HIV Surveillance --- United States, 1981--2008 [Internet]. 2011 Jun p. 689–93. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6021a2.htm

Torian L. HIV Surveillance --- United States, 1981--2008 [Internet]. 2011 Jun p. 689–93. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6021a2.htm

Srirangam A, Mitra R, Wang M, Gorski JC, Badve S, Baldridge L, et al. Effects of HIV protease inhibitor ritonavir on Akt-regulated cell proliferation in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 15;12(6):1883–96.

Srirangam A, Mitra R, Wang M, Gorski JC, Badve S, Baldridge L, et al. Effects of HIV protease inhibitor ritonavir on Akt-regulated cell proliferation in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 15;12(6):1883–96.

Jiang W, Mikochik PJ, Ra JH, Lei H, Flaherty KT, Winkler JD, et al. HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir inhibits growth of human melanoma cells by induction of cell cycle arrest. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):1221–7.

Jiang W, Mikochik PJ, Ra JH, Lei H, Flaherty KT, Winkler JD, et al. HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir inhibits growth of human melanoma cells by induction of cell cycle arrest. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):1221–7.

Maksimovic-Ivanic D, Fagone P, McCubrey J, Bendtzen K, Mijatovic S, Nicoletti F. HIV-protease inhibitors for the treatment of cancer: repositioning HIV protease inhibitors while developing more potent NO-hybridized derivatives? Int J Cancer. 2017;140(8):1713–26.

Maksimovic-Ivanic D, Fagone P, McCubrey J, Bendtzen K, Mijatovic S, Nicoletti F. HIV-protease inhibitors for the treatment of cancer: repositioning HIV protease inhibitors while developing more potent NO-hybridized derivatives? Int J Cancer. 2017;140(8):1713–26.

Rakashanda S, Amin S. Proteases as targets in anticancer therapy using their inhibitors. J Life Sci. 2013 Dec 1;5(2):133–8.

Rakashanda S, Amin S. Proteases as targets in anticancer therapy using their inhibitors. J Life Sci. 2013 Dec 1;5(2):133–8.

Trezza A, Cicaloni V, Pettini F, Spiga O. Chapter 2 - Potential roles of protease inhibitors in anticancer therapy. In: Gupta SP, editor. Cancer-Leading Proteases. Academic Press; 2020. p. 13–49.

Trezza A, Cicaloni V, Pettini F, Spiga O. Chapter 2 - Potential roles of protease inhibitors in anticancer therapy. In: Gupta SP, editor. Cancer-Leading Proteases. Academic Press; 2020. p. 13–49.

Gills JJ, Lopiccolo J, Tsurutani J, Shoemaker RH, Best CJM, Abu-Asab MS, et al. Nelfinavir, a lead HIV protease inhibitor, is a broad-spectrum, anticancer agent that induces endoplasmic reticulum stress, autophagy, and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Clin Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;13(17):5183–94.

Gills JJ, Lopiccolo J, Tsurutani J, Shoemaker RH, Best CJM, Abu-Asab MS, et al. Nelfinavir, a lead HIV protease inhibitor, is a broad-spectrum, anticancer agent that induces endoplasmic reticulum stress, autophagy, and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Clin Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;13(17):5183–94.

Bernstein WB, Dennis PA. Repositioning HIV protease inhibitors as cancer therapeutics. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2008 Nov;3(6):666–75.

Bernstein WB, Dennis PA. Repositioning HIV protease inhibitors as cancer therapeutics. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2008 Nov;3(6):666–75.

Xiang T, Du L, Pham P, Zhu B, Jiang S. Nelfinavir, an HIV protease inhibitor, induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in human cervical cancer cells via the ROS-dependent mitochondrial pathway. Cancer Lett. 2015 Aug 1;364(1):79–88.

Xiang T, Du L, Pham P, Zhu B, Jiang S. Nelfinavir, an HIV protease inhibitor, induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in human cervical cancer cells via the ROS-dependent mitochondrial pathway. Cancer Lett. 2015 Aug 1;364(1):79–88.

Brüning A, Friese K, Burges A, Mylonas I. Tamoxifen enhances the cytotoxic effects of nelfinavir in breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res BCR. 2010;12(4):R45.

Brüning A, Friese K, Burges A, Mylonas I. Tamoxifen enhances the cytotoxic effects of nelfinavir in breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res BCR. 2010;12(4):R45.

Nair AB, Jacob S. A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals and human. J Basic Clin Pharm. 2016 Mar;7(2):27–31.

Nair AB, Jacob S. A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals and human. J Basic Clin Pharm. 2016 Mar;7(2):27–31.

Bryson YJ, Mirochnick M, Stek A, Mofenson LM, Connor J, Capparelli E, et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety of nelfinavir when used in combination with zidovudine and lamivudine in HIV-infected pregnant women: pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group (PACTG) protocol 353. HIV Clin Trials. 2008 Apr;9(2):115–25.

Bryson YJ, Mirochnick M, Stek A, Mofenson LM, Connor J, Capparelli E, et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety of nelfinavir when used in combination with zidovudine and lamivudine in HIV-infected pregnant women: pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group (PACTG) protocol 353. HIV Clin Trials. 2008 Apr;9(2):115–25.

Panhard X, Goujard C, Legrand M, Taburet AM, Diquet B, Mentré F, et al. Population pharmacokinetic analysis for nelfinavir and its metabolite M8 in virologically controlled HIV-infected patients on HAART. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2005 Oct;60(4):390–403.

Panhard X, Goujard C, Legrand M, Taburet AM, Diquet B, Mentré F, et al. Population pharmacokinetic analysis for nelfinavir and its metabolite M8 in virologically controlled HIV-infected patients on HAART. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2005 Oct;60(4):390–403.

Barry M, Mulcahy F, Merry C, Gibbons S, Back D. Pharmacokinetics and potential interactions amongst antiretroviral agents used to treat patients with HIV infection. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999 Apr;36(4):289–304.

Barry M, Mulcahy F, Merry C, Gibbons S, Back D. Pharmacokinetics and potential interactions amongst antiretroviral agents used to treat patients with HIV infection. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999 Apr;36(4):289–304.

Nelfinavir Mesylate in Treating Patients With Recurrent, Metastatic, or Unresectable Liposarcoma - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. [cited 2020 Apr 2]. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00233948

Nelfinavir Mesylate in Treating Patients With Recurrent, Metastatic, or Unresectable Liposarcoma - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. [cited 2020 Apr 2]. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00233948

Suk KH, Gopinath SCB. Drug encapsulated nanoparticles for treating targeted cells. Curr Med Chem. 2017;24(30):3310–21.

Suk KH, Gopinath SCB. Drug encapsulated nanoparticles for treating targeted cells. Curr Med Chem. 2017;24(30):3310–21.

Vaidya B, Kulkarni NS, Shukla SK, Parvathaneni V, Chauhan G, Damon JK, et al. Development of inhalable quinacrine loaded bovine serum albumin modified cationic nanoparticles: repurposing quinacrine for lung cancer therapeutics. Int J Pharm. 2020 Mar 15;577:118995.

Vaidya B, Kulkarni NS, Shukla SK, Parvathaneni V, Chauhan G, Damon JK, et al. Development of inhalable quinacrine loaded bovine serum albumin modified cationic nanoparticles: repurposing quinacrine for lung cancer therapeutics. Int J Pharm. 2020 Mar 15;577:118995.

Mendes LP, Sarisozen C, Luther E, Pan J, Torchilin VP. Surface-engineered polyethyleneimine-modified liposomes as novel carrier of siRNA and chemotherapeutics for combination treatment of drug-resistant cancers. Drug Deliv. 2019 Jan 1;26(1):443–58.

Mendes LP, Sarisozen C, Luther E, Pan J, Torchilin VP. Surface-engineered polyethyleneimine-modified liposomes as novel carrier of siRNA and chemotherapeutics for combination treatment of drug-resistant cancers. Drug Deliv. 2019 Jan 1;26(1):443–58.

Majumder J, Taratula O, Minko T. Nanocarrier-based systems for targeted and site specific therapeutic delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2019 Apr 1;144:57–77.

Majumder J, Taratula O, Minko T. Nanocarrier-based systems for targeted and site specific therapeutic delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2019 Apr 1;144:57–77.

Lombardo D, Kiselev MA, Caccamo MT. Smart Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery Application: Development of Versatile Nanocarrier Platforms in Biotechnology and Nanomedicine. Fratoddi I, editor. J Nanomater. 2019 Feb 27;2019:3702518.

Lombardo D, Kiselev MA, Caccamo MT. Smart Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery Application: Development of Versatile Nanocarrier Platforms in Biotechnology and Nanomedicine. Fratoddi I, editor. J Nanomater. 2019 Feb 27;2019:3702518.

Martins JP. das Neves J, de la Fuente M, Celia C, Florindo H, Günday-Türeli N, et al. the solid progress of nanomedicine. Drug Deliv. Transl Res. 2020 Mar;5.

Martins JP. das Neves J, de la Fuente M, Celia C, Florindo H, Günday-Türeli N, et al. the solid progress of nanomedicine. Drug Deliv. Transl Res. 2020 Mar;5.

Anderson JM, Shive MS. Biodegradation and biocompatibility of PLA and PLGA microspheres. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2012 Dec 1;64:72–82.

Anderson JM, Shive MS. Biodegradation and biocompatibility of PLA and PLGA microspheres. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2012 Dec 1;64:72–82.

Chandolu V, Dass CR. Treatment of lung cancer using nanoparticle drug delivery systems. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2013 Jun;10(2):170–6.

Chandolu V, Dass CR. Treatment of lung cancer using nanoparticle drug delivery systems. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2013 Jun;10(2):170–6.

Shukla SK, Kulkarni NS, Farrales P, Kanabar DD, Parvathaneni V, Kunda NK, et al. Sorafenib loaded inhalable polymeric Nanocarriers against non-small cell lung cancer. Pharm Res. 2020 Mar 12;37(3):67.

Shukla SK, Kulkarni NS, Farrales P, Kanabar DD, Parvathaneni V, Kunda NK, et al. Sorafenib loaded inhalable polymeric Nanocarriers against non-small cell lung cancer. Pharm Res. 2020 Mar 12;37(3):67.

Vaidya B, Parvathaneni V, Kulkarni NS, Shukla SK, Damon JK, Sarode A, et al. Cyclodextrin modified erlotinib loaded PLGA nanoparticles for improved therapeutic efficacy against non-small cell lung cancer. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Feb 1;122:338–47.

Vaidya B, Parvathaneni V, Kulkarni NS, Shukla SK, Damon JK, Sarode A, et al. Cyclodextrin modified erlotinib loaded PLGA nanoparticles for improved therapeutic efficacy against non-small cell lung cancer. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Feb 1;122:338–47.

Shukla SK, Kulkarni NS, Chan A, Parvathaneni V, Farrales P, Muth A, et al. Metformin-encapsulated liposome delivery system: an effective treatment approach against breast cancer. Pharmaceutics. 2019 Oct;28:11(11).

Shukla SK, Kulkarni NS, Chan A, Parvathaneni V, Farrales P, Muth A, et al. Metformin-encapsulated liposome delivery system: an effective treatment approach against breast cancer. Pharmaceutics. 2019 Oct;28:11(11).

Gupta V, Gupta N, Shaik IH, Mehvar R, McMurtry IF, Oka M, et al. Liposomal Fasudil, a rho-kinase inhibitor, for prolonged pulmonary preferential vasodilation in pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Control Release Off J Control Release Soc. 2013 Apr 28;167(2):189–99.

Gupta V, Gupta N, Shaik IH, Mehvar R, McMurtry IF, Oka M, et al. Liposomal Fasudil, a rho-kinase inhibitor, for prolonged pulmonary preferential vasodilation in pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Control Release Off J Control Release Soc. 2013 Apr 28;167(2):189–99.

Kulkarni NS, Parvathaneni V, Shukla SK, Barasa L, Perron JC, Yoganathan S, et al. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor conjugated quantum dots for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2019 May 15;133:145–59.

Kulkarni NS, Parvathaneni V, Shukla SK, Barasa L, Perron JC, Yoganathan S, et al. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor conjugated quantum dots for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2019 May 15;133:145–59.

Liang C-C, Park AY, Guan J-L. In vitro scratch assay: a convenient and inexpensive method for analysis of cell migration in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(2):329–33.

Liang C-C, Park AY, Guan J-L. In vitro scratch assay: a convenient and inexpensive method for analysis of cell migration in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(2):329–33.

Franken NAP, Rodermond HM, Stap J, Haveman J, van Bree C. Clonogenic assay of cells in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2006;1(5):2315–9.

Franken NAP, Rodermond HM, Stap J, Haveman J, van Bree C. Clonogenic assay of cells in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2006;1(5):2315–9.

Geissmann Q. OpenCFU, a new free and open-source software to count cell colonies and other circular objects. PLoS One. 2013 Feb 15;8(2):e54072.

Geissmann Q. OpenCFU, a new free and open-source software to count cell colonies and other circular objects. PLoS One. 2013 Feb 15;8(2):e54072.

Lazzari G, Couvreur P, Mura S. Multicellular tumor spheroids: a relevant 3D model for the in vitro preclinical investigation of polymer nanomedicines. Polym Chem. 2017 Aug 30;8(34):4947–69.

Lazzari G, Couvreur P, Mura S. Multicellular tumor spheroids: a relevant 3D model for the in vitro preclinical investigation of polymer nanomedicines. Polym Chem. 2017 Aug 30;8(34):4947–69.

Tchoryk A, Taresco V, Argent RH, Ashford M, Gellert PR, Stolnik S, et al. Penetration and uptake of nanoparticles in 3D tumor spheroids. Bioconjug Chem. 2019 May 15;30(5):1371–84.

Tchoryk A, Taresco V, Argent RH, Ashford M, Gellert PR, Stolnik S, et al. Penetration and uptake of nanoparticles in 3D tumor spheroids. Bioconjug Chem. 2019 May 15;30(5):1371–84.

Lossi L, Castagna C, Merighi A. Caspase-3 mediated cell death in the Normal development of the mammalian cerebellum. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Dec;12:19(12).

Lossi L, Castagna C, Merighi A. Caspase-3 mediated cell death in the Normal development of the mammalian cerebellum. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Dec;12:19(12).

Gross K, Karagiannides I, Thomou T, Koon HW, Bowe C, Kim H, et al. Substance P promotes expansion of human mesenteric preadipocytes through proliferative and antiapoptotic pathways. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):G1012–9.

Gross K, Karagiannides I, Thomou T, Koon HW, Bowe C, Kim H, et al. Substance P promotes expansion of human mesenteric preadipocytes through proliferative and antiapoptotic pathways. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):G1012–9.

Sithara T, Arun KB, Syama HP, Reshmitha TR, Nisha P. Morin inhibits proliferation of SW480 colorectal cancer cells by inducing apoptosis mediated by reactive oxygen species formation and uncoupling of Warburg effect. Front Pharmacol. 2017;8:640.

Sithara T, Arun KB, Syama HP, Reshmitha TR, Nisha P. Morin inhibits proliferation of SW480 colorectal cancer cells by inducing apoptosis mediated by reactive oxygen species formation and uncoupling of Warburg effect. Front Pharmacol. 2017;8:640.

Danaei M, Dehghankhold M, Ataei S, Hasanzadeh Davarani F, Javanmard R, Dokhani A, et al. Impact of particle size and polydispersity index on the clinical applications of Lipidic Nanocarrier systems. Pharmaceutics. 2018 May;18:10(2).

Danaei M, Dehghankhold M, Ataei S, Hasanzadeh Davarani F, Javanmard R, Dokhani A, et al. Impact of particle size and polydispersity index on the clinical applications of Lipidic Nanocarrier systems. Pharmaceutics. 2018 May;18:10(2).

Perry JL, Reuter KG, Luft JC, Pecot CV, Zamboni W, DeSimone JM. Mediating passive tumor accumulation through particle size, tumor type, and location. Nano Lett. 2017 May 10;17(5):2879–86.

Perry JL, Reuter KG, Luft JC, Pecot CV, Zamboni W, DeSimone JM. Mediating passive tumor accumulation through particle size, tumor type, and location. Nano Lett. 2017 May 10;17(5):2879–86.

Dwivedi R, Singh AK, Dhillon A. pH-responsive drug release from dependal-M loaded polyacrylamide hydrogels. J Sci Adv Mater Devices. 2017 Mar 1;2(1):45–50.

Dwivedi R, Singh AK, Dhillon A. pH-responsive drug release from dependal-M loaded polyacrylamide hydrogels. J Sci Adv Mater Devices. 2017 Mar 1;2(1):45–50.

Eaton P, Quaresma P, Soares C, Neves C, de Almeida MP, Pereira E, et al. A direct comparison of experimental methods to measure dimensions of synthetic nanoparticles. Ultramicroscopy. 2017 Nov 1;182:179–90.

Eaton P, Quaresma P, Soares C, Neves C, de Almeida MP, Pereira E, et al. A direct comparison of experimental methods to measure dimensions of synthetic nanoparticles. Ultramicroscopy. 2017 Nov 1;182:179–90.

Muthu MS, Feng S-S. Pharmaceutical stability aspects of nanomedicines. Nanomed. 2009 Dec 1;4(8):857–60.

Muthu MS, Feng S-S. Pharmaceutical stability aspects of nanomedicines. Nanomed. 2009 Dec 1;4(8):857–60.

Santamaría-Aguirre J, Alcocer-Vallejo R, López-Fanárraga M. Drug nanoparticle stability assessment using isothermal and nonisothermal approaches. J Nanomater. 2018;2018:e3047178.

Santamaría-Aguirre J, Alcocer-Vallejo R, López-Fanárraga M. Drug nanoparticle stability assessment using isothermal and nonisothermal approaches. J Nanomater. 2018;2018:e3047178.

Zhao Y-Z, Sun C-Z, Lu C-T, Dai D-D, Lv H-F, Wu Y, et al. Characterization and anti-tumor activity of chemical conjugation of doxorubicin in polymeric micelles (DOX-P) in vitro. Cancer Lett. 2011;311(2):187–94.

Zhao Y-Z, Sun C-Z, Lu C-T, Dai D-D, Lv H-F, Wu Y, et al. Characterization and anti-tumor activity of chemical conjugation of doxorubicin in polymeric micelles (DOX-P) in vitro. Cancer Lett. 2011;311(2):187–94.

Oh JE, Nam YS, Lee KH, Park TG. Conjugation of drug to poly (D, L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) for controlled release from biodegradable microspheres. J Control Release. 1999;57(3):269–80.

Oh JE, Nam YS, Lee KH, Park TG. Conjugation of drug to poly (D, L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) for controlled release from biodegradable microspheres. J Control Release. 1999;57(3):269–80.

Soprano M, Sorriento D, Rusciano MR, Maione AS, Limite G, Forestieri P, et al. Oxidative stress mediates the Antiproliferative effects of nelfinavir in breast cancer cells. PLoS One. 2016 Jun;9:11(6).

Soprano M, Sorriento D, Rusciano MR, Maione AS, Limite G, Forestieri P, et al. Oxidative stress mediates the Antiproliferative effects of nelfinavir in breast cancer cells. PLoS One. 2016 Jun;9:11(6).

Dunlop EA, Johnson CE, Wiltshire M, Errington RJ, Tee AR. Targeting protein homeostasis with nelfinavir/salinomycin dual therapy effectively induces death of mTORC1 hyperactive cells. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 25;8(30):48711–24.

Dunlop EA, Johnson CE, Wiltshire M, Errington RJ, Tee AR. Targeting protein homeostasis with nelfinavir/salinomycin dual therapy effectively induces death of mTORC1 hyperactive cells. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 25;8(30):48711–24.

Brüning A, Rahmeh M, Gingelmaier A, Friese K. The mitochondria-independent cytotoxic effect of nelfinavir on leukemia cells can be enhanced by sorafenib-mediated mcl-1 downregulation and mitochondrial membrane destabilization. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jan 27;9:19.

Brüning A, Rahmeh M, Gingelmaier A, Friese K. The mitochondria-independent cytotoxic effect of nelfinavir on leukemia cells can be enhanced by sorafenib-mediated mcl-1 downregulation and mitochondrial membrane destabilization. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jan 27;9:19.

Koltai T. Nelfinavir and other protease inhibitors in cancer: mechanisms involved in anticancer activity. F1000Research. 2015;4:9.

Koltai T. Nelfinavir and other protease inhibitors in cancer: mechanisms involved in anticancer activity. F1000Research. 2015;4:9.

Rajendran V, Jain MV. In vitro tumorigenic assay: Colony forming assay for cancer stem cells. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ. 1692;2018:89–95.

Rajendran V, Jain MV. In vitro tumorigenic assay: Colony forming assay for cancer stem cells. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ. 1692;2018:89–95.

Parvathaneni V, Kulkarni NS, Shukla SK, Farrales PT, Kunda NK, Muth A, et al. Systematic development and optimization of inhalable Pirfenidone liposomes for non-small cell lung cancer treatment. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Feb;28:12(3).

Parvathaneni V, Kulkarni NS, Shukla SK, Farrales PT, Kunda NK, Muth A, et al. Systematic development and optimization of inhalable Pirfenidone liposomes for non-small cell lung cancer treatment. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Feb;28:12(3).

Breslin S, O’Driscoll L. Three-dimensional cell culture: the missing link in drug discovery. Drug Discov Today. 2013 Mar;18(5–6):240–9.

Breslin S, O’Driscoll L. Three-dimensional cell culture: the missing link in drug discovery. Drug Discov Today. 2013 Mar;18(5–6):240–9.

Fennema E, Rivron N, Rouwkema J, van Blitterswijk C, de Boer J. Spheroid culture as a tool for creating 3D complex tissues. Trends Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;31(2):108–15.

Fennema E, Rivron N, Rouwkema J, van Blitterswijk C, de Boer J. Spheroid culture as a tool for creating 3D complex tissues. Trends Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;31(2):108–15.

Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Caspase activation pathways: some recent progress. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Jul;16(7):935–8.

Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Caspase activation pathways: some recent progress. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Jul;16(7):935–8.

Ferraro-Peyret C, Quemeneur L, Flacher M, Revillard J-P, Genestier L. Caspase-independent phosphatidylserine exposure during apoptosis of primary T lymphocytes. J Immunol. 2002 Nov 1;169(9):4805–10.

Ferraro-Peyret C, Quemeneur L, Flacher M, Revillard J-P, Genestier L. Caspase-independent phosphatidylserine exposure during apoptosis of primary T lymphocytes. J Immunol. 2002 Nov 1;169(9):4805–10.

Parker RA, Flint OP, Mulvey R, Elosua C, Wang F, Fenderson W, et al. Endoplasmic reticulum stress links dyslipidemia to inhibition of proteasome activity and glucose transport by HIV protease inhibitors. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;67(6):1909–19.

Parker RA, Flint OP, Mulvey R, Elosua C, Wang F, Fenderson W, et al. Endoplasmic reticulum stress links dyslipidemia to inhibition of proteasome activity and glucose transport by HIV protease inhibitors. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;67(6):1909–19.

Mimnaugh EG, Xu W, Vos M, Yuan X, Neckers L. Endoplasmic reticulum vacuolization and valosin-containing protein relocalization result from simultaneous hsp90 inhibition by geldanamycin and proteasome inhibition by velcade. Mol Cancer Res MCR. 2006 Sep;4(9):667–81.

Mimnaugh EG, Xu W, Vos M, Yuan X, Neckers L. Endoplasmic reticulum vacuolization and valosin-containing protein relocalization result from simultaneous hsp90 inhibition by geldanamycin and proteasome inhibition by velcade. Mol Cancer Res MCR. 2006 Sep;4(9):667–81.

Armando RG, Mengual Gómez DL, Gomez DE. New drugs are not enough-drug repositioning in oncology: an update. Int J Oncol. 2020 Mar 1;56(3):651–84.

Armando RG, Mengual Gómez DL, Gomez DE. New drugs are not enough-drug repositioning in oncology: an update. Int J Oncol. 2020 Mar 1;56(3):651–84.

Rengan R, Mick R, Pryma DA, Lin LL, Christodouleas J, Plastaras JP, et al. Clinical outcomes of the HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir with concurrent Chemoradiotherapy for Unresectable stage IIIA/IIIB non-small cell lung cancer: a phase 1/2 trial. JAMA Oncol. 2019 Aug;22.

Rengan R, Mick R, Pryma DA, Lin LL, Christodouleas J, Plastaras JP, et al. Clinical outcomes of the HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir with concurrent Chemoradiotherapy for Unresectable stage IIIA/IIIB non-small cell lung cancer: a phase 1/2 trial. JAMA Oncol. 2019 Aug;22.

Patra JK, Das G, Fraceto LF, Campos EVR, Rodriguez-Torres M d P, Acosta-Torres LS, et al. Nano based drug delivery systems: recent developments and future prospects J Nanobiotechnology. 2018 Sep;19:16.

Patra JK, Das G, Fraceto LF, Campos EVR, Rodriguez-Torres M d P, Acosta-Torres LS, et al. Nano based drug delivery systems: recent developments and future prospects J Nanobiotechnology. 2018 Sep;19:16.

Khan MN, Haggag YA, Lane ME, McCarron PA, Tambuwala MM. Polymeric Nano-encapsulation of curcumin enhances its anti-cancer activity in breast (MDA-MB231) and lung (A549) cancer cells through reduction in expression of HIF-1α and nuclear p65 (Rel a). Curr Drug Deliv. 2018 Feb 14;15(2):286–95.

Khan MN, Haggag YA, Lane ME, McCarron PA, Tambuwala MM. Polymeric Nano-encapsulation of curcumin enhances its anti-cancer activity in breast (MDA-MB231) and lung (A549) cancer cells through reduction in expression of HIF-1α and nuclear p65 (Rel a). Curr Drug Deliv. 2018 Feb 14;15(2):286–95.

Venkatesh DN, Baskaran M, Karri VVSR, Mannemala SS, Radhakrishna K, Goti S. Fabrication and in vivo evaluation of nelfinavir loaded PLGA nanoparticles for enhancing oral bioavailability and therapeutic effect. Saudi Pharm J SPJ. 2015 Nov;23(6):667–74.

Venkatesh DN, Baskaran M, Karri VVSR, Mannemala SS, Radhakrishna K, Goti S. Fabrication and in vivo evaluation of nelfinavir loaded PLGA nanoparticles for enhancing oral bioavailability and therapeutic effect. Saudi Pharm J SPJ. 2015 Nov;23(6):667–74.

Hotze EM, Phenrat T, Lowry GV. Nanoparticle aggregation: challenges to understanding transport and reactivity in the environment. J Environ Qual. 2010;39(6):1909–24.

Hotze EM, Phenrat T, Lowry GV. Nanoparticle aggregation: challenges to understanding transport and reactivity in the environment. J Environ Qual. 2010;39(6):1909–24.

Müller KH, Motskin M, Philpott AJ, Routh AF, Shanahan CM, Duer MJ, et al. The effect of particle agglomeration on the formation of a surface-connected compartment induced by hydroxyapatite nanoparticles in human monocyte-derived macrophages. Biomaterials. 2014 Jan 1;35(3):1074–88.

Müller KH, Motskin M, Philpott AJ, Routh AF, Shanahan CM, Duer MJ, et al. The effect of particle agglomeration on the formation of a surface-connected compartment induced by hydroxyapatite nanoparticles in human monocyte-derived macrophages. Biomaterials. 2014 Jan 1;35(3):1074–88.

Li C, Zhao L, Han J, Wang R, Xiong C, Xie X. Synthesis of citrate-stabilized hydrocolloids of hydroxyapatite through a novel two-stage method: a possible aggregates–breakdown mechanism of colloid formation. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2011 Aug 15;360(2):341–9.

Li C, Zhao L, Han J, Wang R, Xiong C, Xie X. Synthesis of citrate-stabilized hydrocolloids of hydroxyapatite through a novel two-stage method: a possible aggregates–breakdown mechanism of colloid formation. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2011 Aug 15;360(2):341–9.

Baishya H. Application of Mathematical Models in Drug Release Kinetics of Carbidopa and Levodopa ER Tablets. J Dev Drugs. 2017;06(02).

Baishya H. Application of Mathematical Models in Drug Release Kinetics of Carbidopa and Levodopa ER Tablets. J Dev Drugs. 2017;06(02).

Bruschi ML, editor. 5 - Mathematical models of drug release. Woodhead Publishing; 2015.

Bruschi ML, editor. 5 - Mathematical models of drug release. Woodhead Publishing; 2015.

Behzadi S, Serpooshan V, Tao W, Hamaly MA, Alkawareek MY, Dreaden EC, et al. Cellular uptake of nanoparticles: journey inside the cell. Chem Soc Rev. 2017 Jul 17;46(14):4218–44.

Behzadi S, Serpooshan V, Tao W, Hamaly MA, Alkawareek MY, Dreaden EC, et al. Cellular uptake of nanoparticles: journey inside the cell. Chem Soc Rev. 2017 Jul 17;46(14):4218–44.

Hulkower KI, Herber RL. Cell migration and invasion assays as tools for drug discovery. Pharmaceutics. 2011 Mar 11;3(1):107–24.

Hulkower KI, Herber RL. Cell migration and invasion assays as tools for drug discovery. Pharmaceutics. 2011 Mar 11;3(1):107–24.

Justus CR, Leffler N, Ruiz-Echevarria M, Yang LV. In vitro cell migration and invasion assays. J Vis Exp JoVE. 2014 Jun 1;88.

Justus CR, Leffler N, Ruiz-Echevarria M, Yang LV. In vitro cell migration and invasion assays. J Vis Exp JoVE. 2014 Jun 1;88.

Wang X, Decker CC, Zechner L, Krstin S, Wink M. In vitro wound healing of tumor cells: inhibition of cell migration by selected cytotoxic alkaloids. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2019 Jan 9;20(1):4.

Wang X, Decker CC, Zechner L, Krstin S, Wink M. In vitro wound healing of tumor cells: inhibition of cell migration by selected cytotoxic alkaloids. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2019 Jan 9;20(1):4.

Pijuan J, Barceló C, Moreno DF, Maiques O, Sisó P, Marti RM, et al. In vitro cell migration, invasion, and adhesion assays: from cell imaging to data analysis. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2019;7.

Pijuan J, Barceló C, Moreno DF, Maiques O, Sisó P, Marti RM, et al. In vitro cell migration, invasion, and adhesion assays: from cell imaging to data analysis. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2019;7.

Amaral RLF, Miranda M, Marcato PD, Swiech K. Comparative analysis of 3D bladder tumor spheroids obtained by forced floating and hanging drop methods for drug screening. Front Physiol. 2017 Aug;22:8.

Amaral RLF, Miranda M, Marcato PD, Swiech K. Comparative analysis of 3D bladder tumor spheroids obtained by forced floating and hanging drop methods for drug screening. Front Physiol. 2017 Aug;22:8.

Bresciani G, Hofland LJ, Dogan F, Giamas G, Gagliano T, Zatelli MC. Evaluation of spheroid 3D culture methods to study a pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm cell line. Front Endocrinol. 2019;10.

Bresciani G, Hofland LJ, Dogan F, Giamas G, Gagliano T, Zatelli MC. Evaluation of spheroid 3D culture methods to study a pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm cell line. Front Endocrinol. 2019;10.

Parrish AB, Freel CD, Kornbluth S. Cellular Mechanisms Controlling Caspase Activation and Function. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013 Jun;5(6).

Parrish AB, Freel CD, Kornbluth S. Cellular Mechanisms Controlling Caspase Activation and Function. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013 Jun;5(6).

Balaji N, Devy AS, Sumathi MK, Vidyalakshmi S, Kumar GS, D’Silva S. Annexin V – affinity assay – apoptosis detection system in granular cell Ameloblastoma. J Int Oral Health JIOH. 2013 Dec;5(6):25–30.

Balaji N, Devy AS, Sumathi MK, Vidyalakshmi S, Kumar GS, D’Silva S. Annexin V – affinity assay – apoptosis detection system in granular cell Ameloblastoma. J Int Oral Health JIOH. 2013 Dec;5(6):25–30.

Ap D. Beyond annexin V: fluorescence response of cellular membranes to apoptosis. Cytotechnology. 2012 Jul 14;65(2):157–72.

Ap D. Beyond annexin V: fluorescence response of cellular membranes to apoptosis. Cytotechnology. 2012 Jul 14;65(2):157–72.

Lin Y, Jiang M, Chen W, Zhao T, Wei Y. Cancer and ER stress: mutual crosstalk between autophagy, oxidative stress and inflammatory response. Biomed Pharmacother. 2019 Oct 1;118:109249.

Lin Y, Jiang M, Chen W, Zhao T, Wei Y. Cancer and ER stress: mutual crosstalk between autophagy, oxidative stress and inflammatory response. Biomed Pharmacother. 2019 Oct 1;118:109249.

O’brien A, Barber JEB, Reid S, Niknejad N, Dimitroulakos J. Enhancement of cisplatin cytotoxicity by disulfiram involves activating transcription factor 3. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jul 1;32(7):2679–88.

O’brien A, Barber JEB, Reid S, Niknejad N, Dimitroulakos J. Enhancement of cisplatin cytotoxicity by disulfiram involves activating transcription factor 3. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jul 1;32(7):2679–88.

Redmann M, Benavides GA, Berryhill TF, Wani WY, Ouyang X, Johnson MS, et al. Inhibition of autophagy with bafilomycin and chloroquine decreases mitochondrial quality and bioenergetic function in primary neurons. Redox Biol. 2016 Nov 18;11:73–81.

Redmann M, Benavides GA, Berryhill TF, Wani WY, Ouyang X, Johnson MS, et al. Inhibition of autophagy with bafilomycin and chloroquine decreases mitochondrial quality and bioenergetic function in primary neurons. Redox Biol. 2016 Nov 18;11:73–81.

Lim S-J, Choi MK, Kim MJ, Kim JK. Alpha-tocopheryl succinate potentiates the paclitaxel-induced apoptosis through enforced caspase 8 activation in human H460 lung cancer cells. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Oct 31;41(10):737–45.

Lim S-J, Choi MK, Kim MJ, Kim JK. Alpha-tocopheryl succinate potentiates the paclitaxel-induced apoptosis through enforced caspase 8 activation in human H460 lung cancer cells. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Oct 31;41(10):737–45.

Acknowledgments

The author(s) would like to acknowledge the Imaging Facility of CUNY Advanced Science Research Center for instrument use, scientific and technical assistance; and Dr. Aaron Muth, Assistant Professor at St. John’s university for providing EVOS FL fluorescence microscope. The author(s) would also like to acknowledge Dr. Yong Yu (Associate Professor & Graduate Director, Biological Sciences, St. John’s University, NY, USA) for providing porcine kidney proximal tubule cell line (LLC-PK1).

Author information

Authors and Affiliations

Corresponding author

Ethics declarations

Financial Disclosure and Conflict of Interest

This study was supported by start-up funds to VG from College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences (CPHS), St. John’s University. VP was supported by teaching assistantships from CPHS. MG was supported by graduate assistantship from University Learning Commons (ULC) at St. John’s University. SKS and NSK were supported with the research assistantship by National Institutes of Health (NIH) (Grant #1R15HL138606-01A1) to Vivek Gupta.

All authors disclose no conflict of interest.

Additional information

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

About this article

Cite this article

Parvathaneni, V., Goyal, M., Kulkarni, N.S. et al. Nanotechnology Based Repositioning of an Anti-Viral Drug for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). Pharm Res 37, 123 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-020-02848-2

Received:

Received:

Accepted:

Accepted:

Published:

Published:

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-020-02848-2

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-020-02848-2