Hybrid Lipid/Polymer Nanoparticles
for Pulmonary Delivery of siRNA:
Development and Fate Upon In Vitro Deposition
on the Human Epithelial Airway Barrier
Ivana d’Angelo, PhD,1 Gabriella Costabile, PhD,2,3 Estelle Durantie, PhD,3
Paola Brocca, PhD,4 Valeria Rondelli, PhD,4 Annapina Russo, PhD,5 Giulia Russo, PhD,5
Agnese Miro, PharmD,2 Fabiana Quaglia, PhD,2 Alke Petri-Fink, PhD,3
Barbara Rothen-Rutishauser, PhD,3 and Francesca Ungaro, PhD2
Abstract
Background: Nowadays, the downregulation of genes involved in the pathogenesis of severe lung diseases
through local siRNA delivery appears an interesting therapeutic approach. In this study, we propose novel
hybrid lipid-polymer nanoparticles (hNPs) consisting of poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) and dipalmitoyl
phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) as siRNA inhalation system.
Methods: A panel of DPPC/PLGA hNPs was prepared by emulsion/solvent diffusion and fully characterized. A
combination of model siRNAs against the sodium transepithelial channel (ENaC) was entrapped in optimized
hNPs comprising or not poly(ethylenimine) (PEI) as third component. siRNA-loaded hNPs were characterized for
encapsulation efﬁciency, release kinetics, aerodynamic properties, and stability in artiﬁcial mucus (AM). The fate
and cytotoxicity of hNPs upon aerosolization on a triple cell co-culture model (TCCC) mimicking human epithelial
airway barrier were assessed. Finally, the effect of siRNA-loaded hNPs on ENaC protein expression at 72 hours
was evaluated in A549 cells.
Results: Optimized muco-inert hNPs encapsulating model siRNA with high efﬁciency were produced. The de-
veloped hNPs displayed a hydrodynamic diameter of *150 nm, a low polydispersity index, a negative f potential
close to -25 mV,and a peculiar triphasic siRNA releaselasting for 5 days,which sloweddownin thepresence of PEI.
siRNA formulations showed optimal in vitro aerosol performance after delivery with a vibrating mesh nebulizer.
Furthermore, small-angle X-ray scattering analyses highlighted an excellent stability upon incubation with AM,
conﬁrming the potential of hNPs for direct aerosolization on mucus-lined airways. Studies in TCCC conﬁrmed that
ﬂuorescent hNPs are internalized inside airway epithelial cells and do not exert any cytotoxic or acute proin-
ﬂammatory effect. Finally, a prolonged inhibition of ENaC protein expression was observed in A549 cells upon
treatment with siRNA-loaded hNPs.
Conclusions: Results demonstrate the great potential of hNPs as carriers for pulmonary delivery of siRNA,
prompting toward investigation of their therapeutic effectiveness in severe lung diseases.
Keywords: dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, inhalable nanoparticles, poly(ethylenimine), poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid, siRNA, triple cell coculture
1Di.S.T.A.Bi.F., University of Campania ‘‘Luigi Vanvitelli,’’ Caserta, Italy.
2Laboratory of Drug Delivery, Department of Pharmacy, University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
3Adolphe Merkle Institute, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
4Applied Physics, Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milano, Milano, Italy.
5Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Pharmacy, University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
JOURNAL OF AEROSOL MEDICINE AND PULMONARY DRUG DELIVERY
Volume 31, Number 3, 2018
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Pp. 170–181
DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2017.1364
170
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

Introduction
R
NA interference refers to the inhibition of gene ex-
pression by small, double-stranded RNA molecules
(small interference RNA or siRNA) that direct the mRNA
machinery to degrade a speciﬁc mRNA. siRNA therapeutics
have many advantages in terms of clinical applications, the
ﬁrst of which is their virtual potential to speciﬁcally silence
any gene underlying more-or-less complex pathologies.(1,2)
In particular, severe lung diseases, such as lung cancer or
cystic ﬁbrosis (CF), nowadays represent a very important
area of application for siRNA-based therapies.(3) Never-
theless, to harness the full potential of the siRNA strategy for
severe lung diseases, an appropriately designed delivery
system is mandatory.(4,5)
Naked siRNAs have a half-life of less than an hour in human
plasma and are often unable to penetrate cell membranes. In
fact, cellular uptake and the escape from endolysosomes are
critical steps before siRNA reaches the cytoplasm, where its
target is located. Conceiving siRNA for local delivery by in-
halation, the presence of high mucin, DNA, and actin con-
centrations, makes airway mucus a very complex barrier to
overcome.(4,5) Thus, optimal inhalable formulations are re-
quired: (i) to enhance siRNA stability; (ii) to overcome lung
cellular and noncellular barriers; and (iii) to increase siRNA
availability at the target level.
Amid advanced drug delivery systems, the encapsulation of
siRNA into colloidal carriers is considered a very promising
formulation approach for inhaled treatment of severe lung dis-
eases.(4,5) In this context, biodegradable poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid (PLGA) nanoparticles (NPs) are gaining considerable in-
terest since they may provide protection of the therapeutic cargo
from enzymatic degradation, prolonged release (i.e., decreased
number of administrations), and improved retention in the
lungs.(6,7) Nevertheless, particle engineering with excipients
aimed to overcome the mucus-lined human lung epithelial
barrier is essential.(8,9)
In the attempt to combine the most valuable properties of
both lipid and polymeric nanocarriers, hybrid lipid-polymer
NPs (hNPs) have recently been proposed.(10,11) Thanks to
their ability to form a shell upon the polymer core, lipids
may be useful to impart peculiar surface properties to the
carrier, likely tuning NP interactions with the lung envi-
ronment, while enhancing their tolerance in the pulmonary
tract.(10) In fact, the use of endogenous phospholipids, such
as dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC), can be consid-
ered a valid approach to increase NP compatibility with the
lung environment. Furthermore, DPPC has been shown to
improve the technological features of PLGA particles aimed
to nucleic acid delivery to the lung.(12,13)
Along these lines, the aim of this work was to design and
optimizehNPsconsistingofPLGAand DPPC, introducing PEI
as a third component to assist siRNA encapsulation in the
hNPs. A preliminary formulation study allowed to select op-
timized muco-inert DPPC/PLGA and PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs
displaying optimal in vitro aerosol performance. A particular
attention was devoted tothe characterizationofthe carrier upon
contact with simulated lung ﬂuids through a combination of
analytical techniques, that is spectrophotometric assay, dynamic
light scattering (DLS), and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS).
To allow a proof of principle of RNP potential for siRNA
delivery to the lung, selected formulations were loaded with
model therapeutic siRNAs of interest for CF therapy, which
is a combination of siRNA against the a and b subunits of
the sodium transepithelial channel (ENaC). siRNA-loaded
hNPs were fully characterized for size, zeta potential, en-
capsulation efﬁciency, and in vitro release kinetics. A
thorough in vitro study allowed to assess the fate and the
effect of hNPs upon aerosolization on a triple cell co-culture
model (TCCC) grown at air–liquid interface (ALI) mim-
icking the human airway epithelial barrier.(14) Finally, the
in vitro effects of siRNA-loaded hNPs on the expression of
aENaC and bENaC subunits were evaluated on a model
human lung epithelial cell line.
Materials and Methods
Materials
Resomer RG 502H (uncapped PLGA 50:50, inherent vis-
cosity 0.16 0.24dL/g) was purchased from Evonik Industries
AG (Germany). Rhodamine-labeled PLGA was synthesized
as previously described.(15) 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphocholine (DPPC) was a kind gift of Lipoid GmbH
(Switzerland). siGENOME SMARTpool siRNA against a
and b subunits of the sodium transepithelial channel (ENaC)
(Human SCNN1A and SCNN1B; 19 mer duplexes; Mw =
13.4 kDa) and siGENOME Non-Targeting siRNA Pool
were purchased from Dharmacon (GE Healthcare).
Ph.Eur. grade mannitol (Pearlitol C160) was kindly
gifted by Roquette Italia S.p.a. (Italy). Egg yolk emulsion,
deoxyribonucleic acid sodium salt from calf thymus (DNA),
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), phosphate buffer
salts, branched polyethylenimine (PEI; 25 kDa), potassium
chloride, rhodamine B (Rhod-B), RPMI 1640 amino acid
solution, sodium chloride, and mucin from porcine stomach
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Missouri). Methylene
chloride and ethanol 96% (v/v) were supplied by Carlo
Erba (Italy).
Production of DPPC/PLGA hybrid NPs
DPPC/PLGA hNPs were prepared by an emulsion/solvent
diffusion technique. Brieﬂy, a water in oil emulsion (w/o) was
achieved adding 100 lL of water to 1 mL of methylene chlo-
ride containing PLGA (10 mg; 1% w/v) and DPPC at different
DPPC/PLGA weight ratios (1:10, 1:20, 1:50, 1:100, and
1:150), under vortex mixing (2400 minutes-1; Heidolph, Ger-
many). When needed, PEI was added to the internal water
phase at the theoretical loading of 0.016 mg per 100 mg of
PLGA. Just after mixing, the w/o emulsion was added to
12.5mL of ethanol 96% (v/v) under moderate magnetic stir-
ring, leading toimmediate nanoparticleprecipitation.Then, the
formulation was diluted with 12.5 mL of Milli-Q water under
stirring for 10 minutes. Afterward, residue organic solvent was
removed by rotary evaporation under vacuum at 30C (Hei-
dolph VV 2000, Germany). hNPs were isolated from the re-
sulting hNP colloidal dispersion (5mL) by centrifugation at
7000 rcf for 20 minutes at 4C (Hettich Zentrifugen, Germany)
and dispersed in Milli-Q water.
siRNA-loaded hNPs were prepared in optimized formu-
lation conditions at a theoretical loading of 1 nmol/100 mg
of PLGA (N/P theoretical ratio of 10 in PEI-modiﬁed hNPs)
by adding siRNA to the internal water phase.
INHALABLE HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR SIRNA DELIVERY
171
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

Fluorescently-labeled hNPs (DPPC/PLGARhod and DPPC/
PLGARhod) were prepared using rhodamine-labeled PLGA
(PLGA-Rhod) in the organic phase at 10% w/w with respect
to the total PLGA amount.
Characterization of DPPC/PLGA hybrid NPs
Size and zeta potential.
The hydrodynamic diameter
(DH), the polydispersity index (PI), and the zeta potential (f
potential) of hNPs were determined by DLS, with a Malvern
Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, United King-
dom). Results are expressed as mean value – standard de-
viation (SD) of triplicate measurements in different batches.
siRNA loading inside hNPs.
siRNA actual loading was
measured indirectly by quantifying the amount of un-
encapsulated siRNA. Brieﬂy, just after production, hNPs
were collected by centrifugation (7000 rcf for 20 minutes at
4C) and the supernatant was analyzed for siRNA content
using Quant-IT RiboGreen reagent (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entiﬁc, Massachusetts, Stati Uniti) according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions. Quantitative analysis was performed by
spectroﬂuorimetry at kex 480 nm/kem 520 nm (EnVision
Multilabel Plate Readers, PerkinElmer, Inc.). Results are
reported as actual loading (nmol of encapsulated siRNA per
mg of yielded hNPs) and encapsulation efﬁciency (actual
loading/theoretical loading · 100) – SD of values collected
from three different batches.
SAXS spectroscopy.
Synchrotron SAXS measurements
were performed at the ID02 high-brilliance beamline(16) at the
ESRF (Grenoble, France), with a beam cross section of
200 · 400 lm and wavelength k = 0.1 nm, using two different
sample detection distances: 1 and 6 m. The range of investi-
gated momentum transfer, q = (4p/k)sin(h), was 0.0116 nm-1
<q <6.43 nm-1, where 2 h is the scattering angle. All mea-
surements were performed at T = 25C. Samples were put in
plastic capillaries (KI-BEAM, ENKI srl) with 2 mm internal
diameter, 0.05 mm wall thickness, and closed with polyeth-
ylene caps. Capillaries were then mounted horizontally onto
the sample holder. Sample concentration was 10 mg/mL. The
exposure time of each measurement was 0.1 seconds, and
spectra were checked for radiation damage.
The measured SAXS proﬁles report the scattered radia-
tion intensity as a function of the momentum transfer, q,
where 1 m and 6 m sample-to-detector distance spectra were
merged. Solvent subtraction was obtained by measuring
water-ﬁlled capillaries and empty capillaries.
In vitro interaction with mucin.
The light scattering of hNP
aqueous dispersions with or without mucin was assessed by
spectrophotometry as previously described.(8,17) Brieﬂy, a
saturated solution of type II mucin was prepared by centri-
fugation at 6000 rcf for 20 minutes in a mucin dispersion in
water (0.08% w/v) stirred overnight. Then, hNPs were dis-
persed in the mucin solution at a concentration of 1 mg/mL by
vortexing for 1 minute. The light scattering of the mucin/
hNPs mixtures was measured by spectrophotometric analysis
at 650 nm at time 0 and after incubation for 30 and 60 minutes
at room temperature. Reference absorbances of mucin and
1 mg/mL hNP dispersions in water were also evaluated.
Experiments were run in triplicate and results are expressed as
absorbance at 650 nm – SD over time.
The interactions of hNPs with mucin were further inves-
tigated by DLS as previously reported.(9) Brieﬂy, the hNP
dispersions in mucin were examined with the Malvern Zeta-
sizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, United Kingdom).
Experiments were run in triplicate and results are reported as
representative size distribution by intensity of hNPs in mucin
versus hNPs in water. The size distribution proﬁle of the
mucin solution was also recorded as control.
Particle stability in artiﬁcial mucus.
To assess the stability
of siRNA-loaded hNPs and their ability to diffuse inside
airway mucus, SAXS analyses were performed on hNP dis-
persions in the presence of artiﬁcial mucus (AM). As previ-
ously reported,(8) AM was prepared by adding 25 lL of sterile
egg yolk emulsion, 25 mg of mucin, 20 mg of DNA, 30 lL of
aqueous DTPA (1 mg/mL), 25 mg NaCl, 11 mg KCl, and
100 lL of RPMI 1640 to 5 mL of water. The dispersion was
stirred until a homogenous mixture was obtained. For stability
studies, aqueous dispersions of siRNA-loaded hNPs (10 mg/
mL) were mixed with AM in a 1:3 volume ratio for a total
40 lL sample volume. After a 1-hour equilibration time,
SAXS was performed as described above. Particle structure
after a 12-hour incubation with AM was veriﬁed by repeated
SAXS measurements.
In vitro release kinetics of siRNA.
siRNA-loaded hNPs
were characterized for in vitro siRNA release kinetics in
phosphate buffer (120 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, and 10 mM
Na2HPO4) at pH 7.2 (phosphate-buffered saline [PBS]).
Release studies were performed upon dilution of hNP dis-
persions in PBS to a theoretical siRNA concentration of
0.2 nmol/mL. hNP dispersions were incubated in a horizontal
shaking water bath at 37C (ShakeTemp SW 22, Julabo,
Italy). At scheduled time intervals, samples were centrifuged
at 7000 rcf for 20 minutes at 4C to isolate hNPs and the
release medium was withdrawn and analyzed for siRNA
content by spectroﬂuorimetric analysis as described for actual
loading. The medium was replaced by the same amount of
fresh PBS. Experiments were carried out in triplicate and
results expressed as the percentage of siRNA released – SD.
In Vitro aerosol performance.
The aerosolization prop-
erties of ﬂuorescently-labeled DPPC/PLGARhod and PEI/
DPPC/PLGARhod hNP dispersions were investigated in vitro
after delivery from the Aeroneb Go nebulizer (Aerogen Ltd.,
Ireland) by a Next Generation Impactor (NGI) (Copley Sci-
entiﬁc, United Kingdom) according to the Comite´ Europe´en
de Normalization (CEN) standard methodology for nebulizer
systems with sampling at 15 L/minutes and insertion of a ﬁlter
in micro-oriﬁce collector (MOC).(18) Brieﬂy, 1 mL of hNP
dispersion was transferred to the reservoir of the nebulizer,
which was connected to the induction port of the NGI. The
nebulizer was operated at 15 L/minutes, and the aerosol was
drawn through the impactor for 5 minutes, until dryness.
The amount of ﬂuorescent hNPs remaining inside the
nebulizer chamber, deposited on the seven NGI collection
cups, and in the induction port was quantitatively recovered
in NaOH 0.5 M. After stirring at room temperature for
1 hour, the amount of ﬂuorescent hNPs in the resulting so-
lutions was determined by spectroﬂuorimetric analysis at kex
172
D’ANGELO ET AL.
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

553 nm/kem 577 nm (GloMax Explorer, Promega, Italy) as
previously reported.(8) Calibration curves were derived by
analyzing serial dilutions of DPPC/PLGARhod or PEI/DPPC/
PLGARhod standard solutions prepared from a stock of hNPs
degraded in NaOH 0.5 M. The linearity of the response was
veriﬁed over the concentration range 2–200 lg/mL (r2 ‡
0.999). Each experiment was run in triplicate.
The emitted dose (ED) was measured as the difference be-
tween the total amount of hNPs initially placed and the amount
remaining in the nebulizer chamber. Upon emission, the ex-
perimental mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMADexp)
and the geometric SD (GSD) were calculated according to the
European Pharmacopoeia, deriving a plot of cumulative mass
of particle retained in each collection cup (expressed as percent
of total mass recovered in the impactor) versus the cutoff di-
ameter of the respective stage.
The ﬁne particle fraction (FPF) was calculated taking into
account the amount of hNPs deposited in stages 3–7 (MMA-
Dexp <5.39 lm) compared to the initial amount loaded into the
nebulizer chamber, while the respirable fraction (RF) referred
to the total amount recovered from the NGI.
In vitro studies on airway triple cell cocultures
All in vitro exposure experiments were conducted with a
three-dimensional TCCC mimicking the human epithelial
airway barrier comprising human bronchial epithelial cells
(16HBE14o-), human blood monocyte-derived macrophages
(MDM), and dendritic cells (MDDC).(14)
16HBE14o- cell cultures.
16HBE14o- cells were kindly
provided by Dieter Gruenert (passage number P2.54; Uni-
versity California, San Francisco, CA). Cells were maintained
in minimum essential media 1 · (with Earle’s Salts, 25 mM
HEPES and without l-glutamine; Gibco BRL, Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc), supplemented with 1% l-glutamine, 1% penicil-
lin/streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum.
For experimental cultures, cells were seeded at a density
of 0.5 · 106 cells/insert on transparent BD Falcon (Corning)
cell culture inserts (surface area of 0.9 cm2, pores with
3.0 lm diameter, and PET membranes for 12-well plates).
The cell culture inserts were pretreated with 150 lL of a
ﬁbronectin coating solution containing 0.1 mg/mL bovine
serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% Type I bovine collagen
(BD Biosciences, Becton Dickinson, New Jersey), and 1%
human ﬁbronectin (BD Biosciences, Becton Dickinson) in
the LHC Basal Medium (Sigma-Aldrich). Inserts were
placed in BD Falcon tissue culture plates (12-well plates)
with 0.5 mL medium in the upper and 1.5 mL in the lower
chamber. The cells were kept at 37C in 5% CO2 humidiﬁed
atmosphere for 7 days (medium changed after 3–4 days).
TCCC system.
To produce the TCCC in vitro model,
16HBE14o- cell cultures were supplemented on the apical side
with MDM and on the basolateral side with MDDC derived
from human blood as previously reported.(14,19) Brieﬂy,
16HBE14o- cells were cultured as described above. At 5 days,
the medium was removed from the upper and lower chamber,
the inserts turned upside down, and the bottom was abraded
carefully with a cell scraper. The inserts were then incubated
with 65lL medium containing 83· 104 MDDC/mL on the
basal side for 2 hours. Afterward, the inserts were turned
around again and placed in BD Falcon (Corning) tissue culture
plates (12-well plates). In the lower chamber, 1.5 mL of me-
dium, and at the apical side of the TCCC, 500 lL medium
containing 2.5 · 104 MDM/mL were added. The complete
TCCC systems were kept with 1.5 mL of medium in the lower
chamber and 0.5 mL in the upper chamber at 37C in 5% CO2
humidiﬁed atmosphere for 24 hours.
To establish the ALI, the medium in the upper chamber of
the TCCC systems was removed 24 hours before exposure
in the Vitrocell Cloud, while the medium in the lower
chamber was replaced by 0.6 mL of fresh medium.
In vitro TCCC exposure to aerosolized NPs.
Cell expo-
sure to hNPs at ALI was carried out with the Vitrocell Cloud
system (Vitrocell Systems GmbH, Germany). Brieﬂy, the
Vitrocell Cloud consists of three main components: a nebu-
lizer, an exposure chamber, and a ﬂow system, with an in-
cubation
chamber
providing
suitable
temperature
and
humidity cell culture conditions. The aerosol is generated into
the exposure chamber by a perforated vibrating membrane
nebulizer (AeronebPro, with a span of 2.5–6.0 lm volume
mean diameter). Before each experiment, freeze-dried hNPs
were dispersed in 0.5 mM sodium chloride.
For TCCC exposure to low hNP concentrations, 200 lL
of a 0.5 mg/mL hNP dispersion was aerosolized (0.1mg of
hNPs). For high hNP concentrations, TCCC were exposed to
further 400 lL (2· 200 lL) of a 0.9 mg/mL hNP dispersion
(0.5mg of hNPs). TCCC exposed to 0.5 mM sodium chloride
and mannitol aqueous solutions was used as controls. Fol-
lowing the exposure in the chamber (10 and 30 minutes for
0.1 and 0.5 mg of hNPs, respectively), the inserts were im-
mediately placed in new BD Falcon 12- well tissue culture
plates containing 0.6 mL of fresh medium for cell uptake
studies, cytotoxicity assay, and tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-a) release. The morphology of hNPs was analyzed by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) before nebulization
and after exposing a 400 mesh copper ﬁlm grid to nebulized
hNPs. The analysis was performed with a FEI Tecnai spirit
TEM at 120 kV and images were acquired with a Veleta CCD
camera (2048 · 2048 pixels).
Nanoparticle deposition efﬁciency.
The amount of hNPs
deposited upon nebulization inside the Vitrocell Cloud was
assessed. To this purpose, glass coverslips (24 · 24 mm) were
placed onto the compartments for cell culture inserts and ex-
posed to different amounts of aerosolized rhodamine-labeled
DPPC/PLGARhod and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod hNPs. After the
exposure, coverslips were removed and rinsed with NaOH
0.5 M (500lL). After stirring at room temperature for 1 hour,
the amount of ﬂuorescent hNPs in the solutions was quantiﬁed
by spectroﬂuorimetric analysis as described for in vitro aerosol
performance. Results are reported as lg of hNPs deposited
per cm2 – SD of values collected from triplicate analyses.
Cell uptake studies.
The TCCC was exposed to different
amounts of aerosolized rhodamine-labeled DPPC/PLGARhod
and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod hNPs. After 24 hours postexpo-
sure, TCCC were ﬁxed for 15 minutes with 3% paraformal-
dehyde in PBS at room temperature and cells were washed
thrice in PBS. The F-actin cytoskeleton and the DNA of all
cells were stained with phalloidin (ALEXA 488) (Molecular
Probes, Life Technologies Europe B.V., Switzerland) and
INHALABLE HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR SIRNA DELIVERY
173
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

4¢,6- diamidin-2-phenylindol (DAPI) (1 lg/mL) in a 1:100
and 1:50 dilution in 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS, respectively.
For microscopy, membranes were embedded in Glycergel
(DAKO Schweiz AG, Baar, Switzerland). Sample analysis
was performed with an inverted Zeiss confocal laser scanning
microscope 710 (LSM, Axio Observer.Z1, Zeiss, Germany).
Representative images (z-stacks) were recorded at three in-
dependent ﬁelds of view for each sample. Image processing
was achieved using the 3D reconstruction software Imaris
(Bitplane AG, Switzerland).
Cytotoxicity assay.
The TCCC was exposed to different
amounts of aerosolized siRNA-DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-PEI/
DPPC/PLGA, and corresponding empty hNPs. After 24 hours
postexposure at 37C, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release
by the TCCC, indicative of cell membrane damage, was as-
sessed by the LDH cytotoxicity detection kit (Roche Applied
Science, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s guide-
lines. The test was performed in triplicates and evaluated in
comparison to the negative controls, which are TCCC ex-
posed to aqueous solutions of 0.5 mM sodium chloride or
mannitol at the same concentrations of hNP dispersions. As a
positive control, TCCC were treated with 100 lL of 0.2%
Triton X-100 in PBS on the apical side and incubated for
24 hours at 37C and 5% CO2.
Tumor necrosis factor-a release.
The potential proin-
ﬂammatory response was also investigated after 24 hours
postexposure to hNPs by quantifying the release of TNF-a
using an ELISA kit (R&D Systems) according to the man-
ufacturer’s protocol.
In vitro gene silencing effect
Cell cytotoxicity.
A549 cells were seeded onto 96-well
plates (5 · 104 cells/well) and incubated with hNPs for 24
and 48–72 hours. Then, cell viability was evaluated by MTT
assay as previously reported.(20a)
Cell culture, transfection, and treatment.
Human alveolar
basal epithelial cell line (A549) was cultured in Dulbecco’s
modiﬁed Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% heat-
inactivated fetal bovine serum (Microtech), 1.5 mM L-
glutamine, 100 units/mL penicillin, and 100lg/mL streptomycin
under humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37C. siRNA
transfections and treatments were performed as previously
described.(20b)
Western blotting.
Total proteins (75 lg) were extracted
from the cells, separated on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and electrotransferred on
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) as previously described.(21)
Then, the membrane was incubated for 2 hours with 5%
nonfat milk to block nonspeciﬁc binding sites and incubated
2 hours at room temperature with the following anti-
bodies: anti-bENaC (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-
SCNN1A (Proteintech Europe), and anti-b-actin (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology). Densitometric analysis was carried out using
ImageJ software (Image 1.49v, available on: http://imagej.
nih.gov/ij, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).
Data analysis
Cell studies were performed in triplicate and results are
expressed as mean value – standard error mean (n = 3). The
signiﬁcance of differences was determined with the software
Kaleida graph using one-way analysis of variance followed
by Bonferroni post-hoc test. A p-value <0.05 was considered
signiﬁcant.
Results
Development studies of DPPC/PLGA hNPs
for siRNA loading
In-depth formulation studies were performed on empty
hNPs to establish the optimal ratio between the selected
components, that is, PLGA, DPPC, and PEI. Overall hNP
properties are reported in Table 1.
Independent of the amount of DPPC added to the organic
phase and the presence of PEI in the internal water phase, the
adopted formulation conditions lead to the formation of
hNPs with DH ranging between *135 and *169 nm, low PI
(<0.130), and negative f potentials (between -16 and
-30 mV). Nevertheless, in each case, a ﬂocculation of the
exceeding amount of the lipid component was apparent after
rotary evaporation of the diffusion solvent under vacuum.
This phenomenon was particularly evident when high
amounts of DPPC were added to the formulation (i.e., DPPC/
Table 1. Composition, Size, Polydispersity Index, and Zeta Potential of Empty
DPPC/PLGA and PEI/DPPC/PLGA Hybrid Lipid-Polymer Nanoparticles
Formulation
PEI theoretical
loading (mg/100 mg
of PLGA)
DPPC/PLGA
ratio (w/w)
DH
(nm – SD)
PI
(mean – SD)
f potential
(mV – SD)
DPPC/PLGA10
—
1:10
151.3 – 21.3
0.127 – 0.079
-25.3 – 0.5
DPPC/PLGA 20
—
1:20
149.7 – 2.1
0.083 – 0.006
-23.2 – 2.4
DPPC/PLGA 50
—
1:50
135.4 – 17.2
0.088 – 0.008
-24.3 – 6.0
DPPC/PLGA 100
—
1:100
158.9 – 7.1
0.082 – 0.004
-28.4 – 2.9
DPPC/PLGA 150
—
1:150
168.6 – 7.1
0.124 – 0.094
-15.7 – 1.3
PEI/DPPC/PLGA 10
0.016
1:10
166.5 – 13.9
0.128 – 0.093
-26.1 – 0.5
PEI/DPPC/PLGA 20
0.016
1:20
165.4 – 9.1
0.102 – 0.006
-31.7 – 1.2
PEI/DPPC/PLGA 50
0.016
1:50
162.3 – 13.9
0.124 – 0.041
-28.0 – 0.7
PEI/DPPC/PLGA 100
0.016
1:100
150.9 – 30.4
0.106 – 0.027
-28.0 – 0.3
PEI/DPPC/PLGA 150
0.016
1:150
146.4 – 0.3
0.123 – 0.027
-22.2 – 2.7
PI, polydispersity index; SD, standard deviation.
174
D’ANGELO ET AL.
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

PLGA 1:10 w/w), but it was limited up to a theoretical DPPC/
PLGA ratio of 1:20. Thus, this last ratio was selected for further
studies tomaximizethe amountofDPPCassociatedtothe NPs,
while limiting ﬂocculation. The corresponding formulations,
from here on, are named DPPC/PLGA and PEI/DPPC/PLGA.
Mucin/nanoparticle interaction studies were performed by
measuring the absorbance at 650 nm of DPPC/PLGA and
PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs in mucin over time (Fig. 1A). While
the absorbance of the reference mucin dispersion was close to
zero, higher values of absorbance were observed at each time
point upon addition of hNP dispersions. Nevertheless, no
signiﬁcant differences were observed between absorbance of
hNPs dispersed in water or mucin (Fig. 1A). The interactions
between mucin and either DPPC/PLGA or PEI/DPPC/PLGA
hNP were analyzed also by DLS (Fig. 1B, C, respectively).
The combined particle size distribution for the various
replicates shows no change in the position and intensity of the
peak. Inlinewithpreviousstudies,(9) the apparentdimension of
bare PLGA is signiﬁcantly shifted to larger sizes upon addition
of mucin, reﬂecting strong mucin/NP hydrophobic interac-
tions, which likely provide a basis for mucoadhesive NPs
(Supplementary Fig. S1A; Supplementary Data are available
online at www.liebertpub.com/jamp). A similar behavior was
observed for bare PEI-PLGA NPs (Supplementary Fig. S1B).
Characterization of siRNA-loaded DPPC/PLGA hNPs
A model siRNA against ENaC was entrapped in DPPC/
PLGA and PEI/DPPC/PLGA formulations at the theoretical
loading of 1 nmol/100mg of PLGA. The addition of siRNA
inside the formulation did not result in signiﬁcant changes of
hNP size and PI (Table 2) compared to empty hNPs (Table 1).
siRNA-loaded hNPswith a DH around 140 nm (141 and 142 nm
for siRNA-DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA, re-
spectively) and low PI were produced with good yields (52%
and 53% for siRNA-DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/
PLGA, respectively). siRNA was effectively incorporated in-
side DPPC/PLGA hNPs with a mean encapsulation efﬁciency
of 75%. The addition of PEI inside the formulation allowed
to reach an excellent encapsulation efﬁciency of 96%, thus
increasing siRNA actual loading from 1.35 to 1.74 nmol per
100 mg of hNPs.
Results of in vitro release studies performed at physio-
logical pH and temperature (pH 7.2 and 37C) are reported
in Figure 2 as percentage of siRNA released over time.
Both siRNA-DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA
hNPs displayed a typical triphasic release proﬁle, characterized
byaninitial burst,withmorethan50% ofsiRNA releasedinthe
ﬁrst hours, followed by a slow release phase lasting a couple of
days and a ﬁnal fast release time period after 4–5 days. Al-
though, both formulations show similar release proﬁle, siRNA/
FIG. 1.
In vitro assessment of mucin interactions with op-
timized empty DPPC/PLGA and PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs. (A)
Scattering at 650 nm of hNPs in mucin (1mg/mL) over time.
The absorbance at 650 nm of mucin and hNP dispersions in
water is reported as control. (B–C) Size distribution by inten-
sity of hNP dispersions in water or a saturated mucin solution
evaluated by DLS. The size distribution proﬁle of mucin in
water is reported as control (B DPPC/PLGA hNPs and C PEI/
DPPC/PLGA). hNPs, hybrid lipid-polymer nanoparticles.
Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/jamp
Table 2. Properties of siRNA-Loaded Hybrid
Lipid-Polymer Nanoparticles
siRNA-DPPC/
PLGA
siRNA-PEI/
DPPC/PLGA
DH (nm – SD)
141 – 0.50
142 – 1.8
PI (mean – SD)
0.120 – 0.018
0.114 – 0.0050
f potential (mV – SD)
-29.1 – 1.6
-29.9 – 1.4
Yield of production
(% – SD)
52.0 – 8.9
53.4 – 2.5
siRNA actual loadinga
(% – SD)
1.35 – 0.02
1.74 – 0.04
Encapsulation efﬁciency
(% – SD)
74.8 – 1.5
95.9 – 2.2
asiRNA loading was expressed as nmol of encapsulated siRNA
per 100 mg of hNPs. siRNA theoretical loading was 1 nmol/100 mg
of hNPs.
hNPs, hybrid lipid-polymer nanoparticles.
INHALABLE HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR SIRNA DELIVERY
175
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

DPPC/PLGA hNPs provided a signiﬁcantly more rapid release
compared to siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs. Nevertheless,
both hNP formulations sustained siRNA release for 1 week.
The I(q) SAXS spectra of siRNA-DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-
PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs are reported in Figure 3 (Top panel). A
low q region affected by the ﬁnite size of the particle in the
range of the 100 nm distances can be identiﬁed. At higher q, an
extended region with q-4 slope shows up, which identiﬁes a
sharp solvent–particle interface and a smooth particle surface.
Giunieranalysis(22)intheinterval0.0116nm-1<q<0.0246nm-1
gives gyration radii Rg = 53– 0.5 nm and Rg= 52– 0.6 nm for
siRNA-DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs,
respectively. If modeled as spheres, this corresponds to particle
radii of 68 and 67nm, in good agreement with hydrodynamic
radii (Table 2). The best ﬁt of I(q) is obtained by applying the
form factor of a distribution of polydispersed spheres with a
number-averaged mean radius of 45– 9 nm for siRNA-DPPC/
PLGA and 42– 11nm for siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs.
The ﬁts are shown in Figure 3 (red lines).
The phospholipid component is possibly coating the PLGA
particle, without forming a bilayer envelope. A comparison
of the spectra of bare PLGA NPs and DPPC/PLGA hNPs is
reported in Supplementary Figure S2 to better illustrate this
point. We underline that PEI and siRNA contents are actually
of the order of lg over 10mg of particles, so that scattering
contribution from those components are not detectable.
Applying SAXS analysis, the stability of hNPs in mucus
was studied during 12 hours after mixing AM with aqueous
dispersions of hNPs in a 3:1 volume ratio. The scattering
spectra obtained after equilibration over 12 hours are reported
in Figure 3 (Bottom panel). Of note, the obtained spectrum is
consistent with the sum of the naked particle spectrum and the
mucus spectrum that give the reconstructed line shown in the
ﬁgure (blue line).
In vitro aerosol performance of the optimized hNP for-
mulations was ﬁrst assessed through NGI. To easily quantify
the amount of hNPs deposited in each cup, blank ﬂuorescent
DPPC/PLGARhod and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod hNPs were used
(Fig. 4). In fact, neither the presence of siRNA nor the addi-
tion of PLGA-Rhod affected hNP size and surface properties,
which are crucial for aerosolization.
According to the new regulatory guidance, both USP and
Ph.Eur. recognize the suitability of the NGI for nebulizer
characterization when used at 15L/min excluding the pre-
separator and placing an internal ﬁlter below the MOC.(18) In
this conﬁguration, the seven NGI stages produce cutoff diam-
eters in the range 14.1–0.98 lm, while the last ﬁve stages have
cutoff diameters between 5.39 and 0.98lm. Figure 4A de-
scribes the cumulative droplet size distribution of the hNP dose
emitted after aerosolization from an Aeroneb Go vibrating-
mesh nebulizer. In both cases, the best ﬁt line was from loga-
rithmic linear regression (r2 > 0.96). The deposition patterns
of DPPC/PLGARhod and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod throughout the
NGI cups are shown in Figure 4B. In both cases, less than 1.5%
of the ED of hNPs was deposited in the throat, with 65%–75%
of the ED recovered from Cups 3–7 (MMADexp<5.39 lm).
FIG. 2.
In vitro release kinetics of siRNA from hNPs in PBS
at pH 7.2. Data are expressed as siRNA released (%) – SD
(n = 3). PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; SD, standard devia-
tion. Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/
jamp
FIG. 3.
Small-angle X-ray scattering spectra of siRNA-
loaded hNPs. Top panel: siRNA-DPPC/PLGA (full dots)
and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA (empty dots) in water. The
red line is the representative ﬁtting of the siRNA-PEI/
DPPC/PLGA data with the form factor of a polydisperse
sphere (red line). Bottom panel: siRNA-DPPC/PLGA (top)
and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA (bottom) after 12 hours of
incubation with artiﬁcial mucus (AM) (empty dots) versus a
reconstructed spectrum obtained by summing up AM and
naked hNP spectra (blue line). siRNA-DPPC/PLGA spec-
trum is stacked for clarity. Color images available online at
www.liebertpub.com/jamp
176
D’ANGELO ET AL.
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

Nevertheless, while DPPC/PLGARhod formulation showed a
peak at 5.39 lm, the highest percent of PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod
was recovered from cup with a cutoff diameter of 3.3 lm. As a
consequence, by the same value of GSD, PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod
hNPs displayed a lower MMADexp and, consequently, higher
FPF and RF values compared to DPPC/PLGARhod (Fig. 4C).
In vitro aerosolization of hNPs on TCCC
The ability of aerosolized hNPs to penetrate airway epi-
thelial barrier was probed in vitro on TCCC. The experiments
were carried out on fresh dispersions of freeze-dried hNPs
(1:25 hNP/mannitol weight ratio) in 0.5 mM NaCl for ideal
nebulization. Mannitol was added to the hNPs as cryopro-
tectant to avoid common hNP aggregation in a collapsed
cake.(23) In fact, it induced the lowest variation of DH and PI
with respect to the control, and no difference was observed
when changing the hNP/cryoprotectant ratio (Supplementary
Table S1 and Supplementary Fig. S3). Furthermore, mannitol
could also work facilitating hNP transport through mucus,
and in so doing siRNA diffusion, due to its established ability
to improve ﬂuidity of mucus.(24)
The stability of hNPs during the nebulization process
was conﬁrmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
analysis of freeze-dried siRNA-loaded hNPs in the presence
of mannitol (1:25 NP/mannitol ratio) before and after neb-
ulization in the Vitrocell Cloud (Fig. 5). TEM images sug-
gest a potential core-shell structure for both siRNA-DPPC/
PLGA and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA, which was retained
after the nebulization process, which did not cause any ap-
parent modiﬁcation of the hNP structure or hNP aggregation
for each tested concentration.
The deposition efﬁciency was also evaluated for both tested
formulations, highlighting in each case a homogeneous dis-
tribution of the hNPs on the coverslips inside the exposure
chamber (Supplementary Fig. S4) and a direct correlation be-
tween the delivered and deposited doses of hNPs. In particular,
0.0051– 0.0018 and 0.0127– 0.0058lg/cm2 of hNPs were
deposited on coverslips after nebulization of DPPC/PLGARhod
dispersions at low and high concentrations, respectively.
FIG. 4.
In vitro aerosol performance of DPPC/PLGA and
PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs upon delivery through the Aero-
neb Go nebulizer. (A) Cumulative mass recovered as a
function of the cutoff diameter of the NGI stages; (B) NGI
deposition pattern; (C) ﬁne particle characteristics of the
aerosol cloud. Data are presented as mean – SD (n = 3). NGI,
Next Generation Impactor. Color images available online at
www.liebertpub.com/jamp
FIG. 5.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images
of reconstituted freeze-dried siRNA-loaded hNPs (siRNA-
DPPC/PLGA and siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA) before and af-
ter nebulization. Scale bar is 0.2 lm. Field is representative
of the sample.
INHALABLE HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR SIRNA DELIVERY
177
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

Meanwhile, likely, as a consequence of the good aerosol-
ization properties of PEI-containing formulations, 0.0137–
0.0032 and 0.0334– 0.0069lg/cm2 of hNPs were recovered
from coverslips after nebulization of low and high concentra-
tions of PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod hNPs, respectively.
Fate and cytotoxicity of aerosolized hNPs in TCCC
To study the cell uptake, ﬂuorescently labeled hNPs were
aerosolized on TCCC. After 24 hours postexposure to hNPs,
TCCC were visualized by CLSM (Fig. 6). Results indicate
that both DPPC/PLGARhod and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod hNPs
(labeled in red) can effectively penetrate into cells and are
localized intracellularly.
At the tested concentrations, the developed hNPs displayed
no signiﬁcant cytotoxicity compared to both sodium chloride
and mannitol solutions aerosolized at the same concentrations
of the samples ( p > 0.5) (Fig. 7A). On the other hand, a sig-
niﬁcant cytotoxic effect was observed when the cocultures
were incubated with Triton-X as positive control ( p < 0.001
versus DPPC/PLGARhod and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod). These
ﬁndings were conﬁrmed by CLSM analysis of all treated
samples, since no alteration of cell morphology occurred after
TCCC exposure to hNPs compared to the negative control
(Supplementary Fig. S5).
The potential proinﬂammatory effect of aerosolized empty
and siRNA-loaded hNPs on TCCC was also investigated by
determining TNF-a secretion 24 hours postexposure (Fig. 7B).
Of note, exposure to mannitol and empty hNPs, at both low and
highconcentration,causeda less thanonefold increase ofTNF-
a release to the TCCC exposed to 0.5 mM aqueous sodium
chloride. As for siRNA-loaded hNPs, we can see at all con-
centrations tested a higher production of TNF-a in comparison
to negative control, although values were not signiﬁcantly
different from the mannitol control.
FIG. 6.
CLSM images of TCCC after 24 hours postexpo-
sure to 0.5 mg of ﬂuorescently labeled DPPC/PLGARhod (A)
and PEI/DPPC/PLGARhod (B) hNPs. Red color corresponds
to the hNPs, white color to cytoskeletal F-actin, and cyan
color to nulcei. The arrows show hNPs engulfed by the cells.
TCCC, triple cell coculture model. Color images available
online at www.liebertpub.com/jamp
FIG. 7.
LDH release (A) and TNF-a secretion (B) of TCCC
after 24 hours postexposure to different theoretical amounts
(0.1 and 0.5 mg) of aerosolized empty or siRNA-loaded hNPs.
Sodium chloride was used as negative control. Mannitol
aqueous solutions at the same volume and concentrations used
for hNP samples were also aerosolized for comparison. Triton
0.2% (w/v) in PBS was used as positive control in LDH release
(A). LDH data are presented as mean optical density (OD)
values–SEM of samples diluted 1:10 v/v in cell culture medium
(n=3) (**p<0.001). TNF-a data are presented as the mean fold
increase of samples relative to the negative control (i.e., sodium
chloride) – SEM (n = 3). LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; SEM,
standard error mean; TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor alpha.
Color images available online at www.liebertpub.com/jamp
178
D’ANGELO ET AL.
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

In vitro silencing effect of siRNA-loaded hNPs
Once proven that the developed hNPs are able to overcome
the lung barriers and reach the target cells, we further eval-
uated the effect of siRNA-loaded hNPs on gene silencing
efﬁciency in a human lung epithelial cell line, that is A549
cells. Preliminary cytotoxicity studies showed that both
DPPC/PLGA and PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs exhibited a safe
proﬁle toward A549 cells in a wide range of concentrations
(from 0.2 to 2 mg/mL) up to 72 hours of incubation (Sup-
plementary Fig. S6). Nevertheless, to determine the amount of
siRNA-loaded hNPs necessary to obtain an efﬁcient gene de-
pletion, dose–response studies were further performed by
transiently transfecting A549 cells with increasing concentra-
tions of siRNA pool by using lipofectamine. Results showed a
speciﬁc and dose-dependent silencing of both aENaC and
bENaC subunits (Supplementary Fig. S7). In particular, while
nontargeting siRNA pool at 20 nM did not exert any effect on
the levels of aENaC and bENaC subunits (data not shown),
siRNA pool against ENaC resulted in robust protein knock-
down at 24 hours (about 50% and 60% of gene depletion for
aENaC and bENaC, respectively). This siRNA concentration
was thus selected for in vitro gene silencing studies with
siRNA-loaded hNPs. We found that siRNA pool slowly re-
leased from hNPs resulted in efﬁcient knockdown of both
aENaC and bENaC subunit proteins up to 72 hours (Fig. 8).
Western blots conﬁrmed that protein expression was signiﬁ-
cantly reduced by more than 60% and 40% for aENaC and
bENaC, respectively, bysiRNA-DPPC/PLGA hNPscompared
to control (untreated cells). Of note, the addition of PEI inside
the formulation increased the silencing efﬁciency of siRNA-
loaded hNPs by a further signiﬁcant 10% compared to siRNA-
DPPC/PLGA hNPs. The same amount of blank DPPC/PLGA
and PEI/DPPC/PLGA hNPs did not affect the levels of ENaC
subunits (data not shown).
Discussion
The importance of lung barriers in determining the thera-
peutic efﬁcacy of inhaled drugs in severe lung diseases, such as
CF, is nowadays acknowledged.(7) A current paradigm sug-
gests that only NPs with appropriate size and surface properties
may overcome the complex mucus airway barrier and assist
drug interactions with human airway epithelial cells.(25,26) This
aspect is particularly crucial for siRNA-based therapeutics, the
clinical application of which is further hindered by the short
half-life in vivo and the low capability to penetrate cell mem-
branes. To overcome these issues, we have designed and de-
veloped novel DPPC/PLGA hNPs, containing or not PEI as
third component, suitable for pulmonary delivery of siRNA.
In line with literature data,(10) a DPPC layer is likely present
on the surface of PLGA particles giving rise to a core-shell
structure, which is independent of the presence of PEI. As
demonstrated by hNP/mucus interaction studies, this structure
results in non-mucoadhesive or muco-inert hNPs, reasonably
able to easily penetrate across the airway mucus layer.(8,17)
Furthermore, the adopted formulation conditions allowed the
production of hNPs with a hydrodynamic diameter of 150 nm,
which are expected to easily diffuse through the gel-like
structure of the mucus.(25,27) Finally, aqueous hNPs were
transformed into a solid long-term stable lyophilized powder,
which can be reconstituted in saline and, likely, employed to
co-administer a mucus rehydrating agent, that is mannitol.(24)
If DPPC, which is the principal component of the lung
lining ﬂuids, is expected to tune hNP interactions with the
lung environment, the addition of PEI can play a crucial role
for siRNA entrapment inside DPPC/PLGA hNPs. This hy-
pothesis was conﬁrmed by encapsulation studies performed
on two siRNA sequences, for a and b ENaC subunits, which
have been shown to produce a long-term reduction of trans-
epithelial Na+ currents and ﬂuid absorption.(28) In particular,
the combination of the two siRNA can expand the lung ﬂuid
volume in vitro.(29) Of note, siRNA was entrapped inside
selected hNPs with high efﬁciency, particularly when PEI
was coencapsulated. This effect could be likely ascribed to
the formation of a complex between PEI, employed at the
theoretical N/P ratio of 10, and siRNA.
Information about the presence of PEI/siRNA complexes
inside hNPs could not be derived from SAXS spectra, due to
the very low amounts of both components. Nevertheless,
SAXS analysis clearly demonstrated that the role of PEI in the
formulation is not to affect the overall particle morphology,
except for a very slight decrease of the average size. On the
other hand, the phospholipid component is possibly coating the
PLGA particles, as suggested by TEM analysis. Furthermore,
FIG. 8.
Representative Western blotting of protein extracts
from A549 cells treated or not with siRNA- DPPC/PLGA or
siRNA-PEI/DPPC/PLGA for 72 hours. aENaC and bENaC
proteins were detected by using the indicated antibodies. Anti-
actin was used as the loading control (A). The quantiﬁcation
of signals is shown (B). The signal of untreated cells (NT) was
set as 1.
INHALABLE HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR SIRNA DELIVERY
179
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

independent of the presence of PEI inside the formulation,
hNPs were stable inside artiﬁcial CF mucus at least for
12 hours, conﬁrming, along with in vitro aerosol performance
studies, the potential of the system for direct aerosolization on
the mucus-lined human airway epithelial barrier.
In fact, to attain maximum siRNA availability at lung
epithelial cells, where its target is located, the hNPs should
(i) uniformly deposit on the airway epithelium in their stable
form; (ii) penetrate inside the lung epithelial barrier; and
(iii) interact with the lung epithelium, without compromis-
ing cell availability. To draw key information on all these
points and to establish a priori target formulation parameters
for siRNA delivery to human airway epithelium, the be-
havior of the developed DPPC/PLGA hNPs after deposition
on triple cell co-cultures, which realistically mimic human
airway epithelium environment, was investigated.
When grown on porous supports at ALI, human bronchial
epithelial cells reproduce in vivo morphology and key phys-
iologic processes, sometimes including tight junctions and
basal and mucus cells.(19,30) Furthermore, direct deposition of
the aerosolized drug to the apical compartment of the cell
culture can be envisaged through systems especially designed
for dose-controlled and spatially uniform deposition of liquid
aerosols on cells,(31,32) such as the Vitrocell Cloud employed
in this study. Results showed that the adopted formulation
conditions allowed to tune hNP properties, so as to achieve
uniform and efﬁcient aerosolization on lung epithelial cells in
their integer form. Afterward, hNPs were demonstrated to
penetrate inside extracellular lung lining ﬂuids, to be taken up
by lung epithelial cells without exerting a cytotoxic effect
or a proinﬂammatory response on the treated lung epithe-
lium model.
Once siRNA molecules overcome the aforementioned lung
epithelial barriers and reach the target cells, they still need to
overcome a series of intracellular barriers to exert their ac-
tivity. Following cell entry, siRNA molecules must escape
early from endosomes to avoid exposure to the noxious acidic
environment as well as late-stage attack by the hydrolases in
the endolysosome.(4) Noteworthy, in vitro ENaC silencing
studies ruled out any degradation process, while proving the
ability of the siRNA released from hNPs to reach the cyto-
plasm and, after binding to its target mRNA, to silence the
gene of interest. As a consequence, robust and long-lasting
knockdown of both aENaC and bENaC proteins could be
achieved.
Conclusions
In this work, we have successfully designed and developed
novel hNPs comprising PLGA likely surrounded by a DPPC
shell, showing size and surface properties optimized for siRNA
transport and delivery at lung. Optimized formulations allowed
the encapsulation of a combination of siRNA against a and b
subunits of ENaC channel with high efﬁciency, which could be
optimized by the addition of PEI inside the formulation. The
developed hNPs were muco-inert and stable inside AM. Stable
hNP-based dry powders were produced by freeze-drying with
mannitol, an osmotic agent of interest for CF treatment. Cell
uptake studies upon in vitro aerosolization on TCCC con-
ﬁrmed the ability of ﬂuorescently labeled hNPs to be inter-
nalized inside the airway epithelial barrier. Hazard assessment
of hNPs demonstrated that the developed system does not exert
cytotoxic or acute proinﬂammatory effect toward any of the
cell components of the co-culture model. Finally, in vitro gene
silencing studies highlighted that released siRNAs are capable
to reduce ENaC protein expression in human lung epithelial
cells. Overall, results demonstrate the great potential of DPPC/
PLGA hNPs as carriers for siRNA delivery on the human ep-
ithelial airway barrier, prompting toward investigation of their
therapeutic effectiveness in severe lung diseases.
Acknowledgments
F.U. gratefully acknowledges Compagnia di San Paolo and
Istituto Banco di Napoli—Fondazione (STAR Program, Ju-
nior Principal Investigator Grant 2013, Napoli_call2013_35)
for ﬁnancial support. G.C. wishes to thank the International
Society for Aerosols in Medicine (ISAM) for the 2015 ISAM
Student Fellowships. E.D., A.P.F., and B.R.R. acknowledge
the ﬁnancial support of the Adolphe Merkle Foundation. The
authors are grateful to Dr. T. Nrayanan, Dr. J. Moller, and to
the ID02 beamline staff at the European Synchrotron Facility
(Grenoble, France) and to Dr. Laetitia Haenni and Dr.
Christoph Monnier at TEM facility of the Adolphe Merkle
Institute for precious technical assistance.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
References
1. Burnett JC, Rossi JJ, and Tiemann K: Current progress of
siRNA/shRNA therapeutics in clinical trials. Biotechnol J.
2011;6:1130–1146.
2. Lee SH, Kang YY, Jang HE, and Mok H: Current pre-
clinical small interfering RNA (siRNA)-based conjugate
systems for RNA therapeutics. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2016;
104:78–92.
3. Karras JG, Sun G, Tay J, and Jackson AL: Reﬂections on
microRNAs in chronic pulmonary disease: Looking into the
miR-ror and crystal ball. Inﬂamm Allergy Drug Targets.
2013;12:88–98.
4. Lam JK, Liang W, and Chan HK: Pulmonary delivery of
therapeutic siRNA. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2012;64:1–15.
5. Merkel OM, Rubinstein I, and Kissel T: siRNA delivery to the
lung: What’s new? Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2014;75:112–128.
6. Ungaro F, d’Angelo I, Miro A, La Rotonda MI, and Qua-
glia F: Engineered PLGA nano- and micro-carriers for
pulmonary delivery: Challenges and promises. J.Pharm
Pharmacol. 2012;64:1217–1235.
7. d’Angelo I, Conte C, La Rotonda MI, Miro A, Quaglia F,
and Ungaro F: Improving the efﬁcacy of inhaled drugs in
cystic ﬁbrosis: Challenges and emerging drug delivery
strategies. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2014;75:92–111.
8. d’Angelo I, Casciaro B, Miro A, Quaglia F, Mangoni ML,
and Ungaro F: Overcoming barriers in Pseudomonas aer-
uginosa lung infections: Engineered nanoparticles for local
delivery of a cationic antimicrobial peptide. Colloids Surf
B Biointerfaces. 2015;135:717–725.
9. Grifﬁths PC, Cattoz B, Ibrahim MS, and Anuonye JC:
Probing the interaction of nanoparticles with mucin for
drug delivery applications using dynamic light scattering.
Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2015;97:218–222.
10. Raemdonck K, Braeckmans K, Demeester J, and De Smedt
SC: Merging the best of both worlds: Hybrid lipid-enveloped
180
D’ANGELO ET AL.
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.

matrix nanocomposites in drug delivery. Chem Soc Rev.
2014;43:444–472.
11. Pandita D, Kumar S, and Lather V: Hybrid poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) nanoparticles: Design and delivery prospec-
tives. Drug Discov Today 2015;20:95–104.
12. Ungaro F, Giovino C, Coletta C, Sorrentino R, Miro A, and
Quaglia F: Engineering gas-foamed large porous particles
for efﬁcient local delivery of macromolecules to the lung.
Eur J Pharm Sci. 2010;41:60–70.
13. De Stefano D, Ungaro F, Giovino C, Polimeno A, Quaglia
F, and Carnuccio R: Sustained inhibition of IL-6 and
IL-8 expression by decoy ODN to NF-kappaB delivered
through respirable large porous particles in LPS-stimulated
cystic ﬁbrosis bronchial cells. J Gene Med. 2011;13:200–
208.
14. Blank F, Rothen-Rutishauser B, and Gehr P: Dendritic cells
and macrophages form a transepithelial network against for-
eign particulate antigens. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007;
36:669–677.
15. Maiolino S, Moret F, Conte C, Fraix A, Tirino P, Ungaro F,
Sortino S, Reddi E, and Quaglia F: Hyaluronan-decorated
polymer nanoparticles targeting the CD44 receptor for the
combined photo/chemo-therapy of cancer. Nanoscale. 2015;
7:5643–5653.
16. Narayanan T, Diat O, and B+Aˆ secke P: SAXS and USAXS
on the high brilliance beamline at the ESRF. Nuclear In-
struments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment 2001;467–468, Part 2:1005–1009.
17. Ungaro F, d’Angelo I, Coletta C, d’Emmanuele di Villa
Bianca R, Sorrentino R, Perfetto B, Tufano MA, Miro A,
La Rotonda MI, and Quaglia F: Dry powders based on
PLGA nanoparticles for pulmonary delivery of antibiotics:
Modulation of encapsulation efﬁciency, release rate and
lung deposition pattern by hydrophilic polymers. J Control
Release. 2012;157:149–159.
18. Marple VA, Olson BA, Santhanakrishnan K, Roberts DL,
Mitchell JP, and Hudson-Curtis BL: Next generation
pharmaceutical impactor: A new impactor for pharmaceu-
tical inhaler testing. Part III. extension of archival cali-
bration to 15 L/min. J Aerosol Med. 2004;17:335–343.
19. Lehmann AD, Daum N, Bur M, Lehr CM, Gehr P, and
Rothen-Rutishauser BM: An in vitro triple cell coculture
model with primary cells mimicking the human alveolar ep-
ithelial barrier. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2011;77:398–406.
20a. Russo A, Saide A, Cagliani R, Cantile M, Botti G, and
Russo G: rpL3 promotes the apoptosis of p53 mutated lung
cancer cells by down-regulating CBS and NFjB upon 5-FU
treatment. Sci Rep. 2016;6:38369.
20b. Pagliara V, Saide A, Mitidieri E, d’Emmanuele di Villa
Bianca R, Sorrentino R, Russo G, and Russo A: 5-FU
targets rpL3 to induce mitochondrial apoptosis via
cystathionine-b-synthase in colon cancer cells lacking p53.
Oncotarget. 2016;7:50333–50348.
21. De Filippis D, Russo A, De SD, Cipriano M, Esposito D,
Grassia G, Carnuccio R, Russo G, and Iuvone T: Palmi-
toylethanolamide inhibits rMCP-5 expression by regulating
MITF activation in rat chronic granulomatous inﬂamma-
tion. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014;725:64–69.
22. Guinier G, and Fournet G: Small Angle Scattering of X-
Rays. John Wiley & sons, New York, 1955. pp. 126–160.
23. Fonte P, Reis S, and Sarmento B: Facts and evidences on
the lyophilization of polymeric nanoparticles for drug de-
livery. J Control Release 2016;225:75–86.
24. Nolan SJ, Thornton J, Murray CS, and Dwyer T: Inhaled
mannitol for cystic ﬁbrosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015;10:CD008649.
25. Ensign LM, Tang BC, Wang YY, Tse TA, Hoen T, Cone R,
and Hanes J: Mucus-penetrating nanoparticles for vaginal
drug delivery protect against herpes simplex virus. Sci
Transl Med. 2012;4:138–179.
26. d’Angelo I, Conte C, Miro A, Quaglia F, and Ungaro F:
Pulmonary drug delivery: A role for polymeric nano-
particles? Curr Top Med Chem. 2015;15:386–400.
27. Lai SK, Wang YY, Hida K, Cone R, and Hanes J: Nano-
particles reveal that human cervicovaginal mucus is riddled
with pores larger than viruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010;107:598–603.
28. Caci E, Melani R, Pedemonte N, Yueksekdag G, Ravazzolo
R, Rosenecker J, Galietta LJ, and Zegarra-Moran O: Epi-
thelial sodium channel inhibition in primary human bron-
chial epithelia by transfected siRNA. Am J Respir Cell Mol
Biol. 2009;40:211–216.
29. Gianotti A, Melani R, Caci E, Sondo E, Ravazzolo R,
Galietta LJ, and Zegarra-Moran O: Epithelial sodium
channel silencing as a strategy to correct the airway surface
ﬂuid deﬁcit in cystic ﬁbrosis. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol.
2013;49:445–452.
30. Rothen-Rutishauser BM, Kiama SG, and Gehr P: A three-
dimensional cellular model of the human respiratory tract
to study the interaction with particles. Am J Respir Cell
Mol Biol. 2005;32:281–289.
31. Endes C, Schmid O, Kinnear C, Mueller S, Camarero-
Espinosa S, Vanhecke D, Foster EJ, Petri-Fink A, Rothen-
Rutishauser B, Weder C, and Clift MJ: An in vitro testing
strategy toward mimicking the inhalation of high aspect
ratio nanoparticles. Part FibreToxicol. 2014;11:40.
32. Endes C, Mueller S, Kinnear C, Vanhecke D, Foster EJ, Petri-
Fink A, Weder C, Clift MJ, and Rothen-Rutishauser B: Fate of
cellulose nanocrystal aerosols deposited on the lung cell sur-
face in vitro. Biomacromolecules. 2015;16:1267–1275.
Received on January 3, 2017
in ﬁnal form, July 26, 2017
Reviewed by:
Olivia Merkel
Sally-Ann Cryan
Address correspondence to:
Barbara Rothen-Rutishauser, PhD
Adolphe Merkle Institute
University of Fribourg
Chemin des Verdiers 4
Fribourg 1700
Switzerland
E-mail: barbara.rothen@unifr.ch
Francesca Ungaro, PhD
Department of Pharmacy
University of Napoli Federico II
Via D. Montesano 49
Napoli 80131
Italy
E-mail: ungaro@unina.it
INHALABLE HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR SIRNA DELIVERY
181
Downloaded by University of Maryland from www.liebertpub.com at 10/22/25. For personal use only.