RESEARCH PAPER
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles as Carrier System
for Water-Soluble Drugs
Deepak Chitkara & Neeraj Kumar
Received: 14 February 2013 /Accepted: 12 May 2013 /Published online: 12 June 2013
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013
ABSTRACT
Purpose Preparation, optimization and in vitro evaluation of
core-shell nanoparticles comprising of a hydrophilic core of
BSA surrounded by a hydrophobic shell of PLGA for loading
water-soluble drugs.
Methods A double emulsion method was optimized for prep-
aration of BSA-PLGA based core-shell nanoparticles. Proof of
concept for core-shell type structure was established by visual
techniques like confocal microscopy and TEM. Characterization
was done for particle size, encapsulation efficiency, drug loading
and in vitro drug release. Cellular uptake was assessed using
confocal microscopy, bio-TEM and HPLC assay, and cytotoxic
activity was tested by MTTassay in MG-63 osteosarcoma cells.
Results The optimized core-shell nanoparticles showed a par-
ticle size of 243 nm (PDI-0.13) and encapsulation efficiency of
40.5% with a drug loading of 8.5% w/w. In vitro drug release
studies showed a sustained release for 12 h. Cellular uptake
studies indicated a rapid and efficient uptake within 2 h. TEM
studies indicated that the core-shell nanoparticles were localized
in cytoplasm region of the cells. Gemcitabine loaded core-shell
nanoparticles showed enhanced cytotoxicity against MG-63
cells as compared to marketed formulation of gemcitabine
(GEMCITE®).
Conclusion These results indicate that core-shell nanoparticles
can be a good carrier system for delivering hydrophilic drugs like
gemcitabine successfully to the cells with enhanced efficacy.
KEY WORDS BSA . core-shell nanoparticles . gemcitabine .
water-soluble drugs
ABBREVIATIONS
BSA
bovine serum albumin
PLGA
poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid)
INTRODUCTION
Delivery of hydrophilic small molecules is challenging due to
their high water solubility, specifically in the presence of a
hydrophobic carrier matrix which poses problems in their
encapsulation at desired drug loading and encapsulation
efficiency. Hydrophilic macromolecules such as proteins
could be encapsulated inside these carriers owing to their
large molecule weight which decreases their diffusivity to the
external aqueous environment. During the preparation of
drug formulations, most carrier systems use aqueous phase
as external medium resulting in a rapid outward diffusion of
hydrophilic molecules from hydrophobic matrix leading to
poor encapsulation. Additionally, low affinity to the polymer
matrix and high surface area of nano-carriers makes them
more vulnerable to rapid drug release.
To overcome this delivery problem, vesicular systems
such as liposomes (1) and polymersomes (2–5) have been
tried for this type of drug molecules since they contain the
inner aqueous core and are partially successful. Polymeric
carrier systems developed using synthetic hydrophobic poly-
mers such as polyester or polyanhydrides are suitable only
for hydrophobic molecules (6–9) and partially to hydrophilic
macromolecules such as proteins and genes (10,11). In case
of small hydrophilic molecules, the same hydrophobic poly-
mers showed either poor pay loads and/or very low encap-
sulation efficiency (12). Delivery systems for hydrophilic
molecule having pH dependent solubility such as doxorubi-
cin hydrochloride (13,14), cloricromene (15), propranolol
hydrochloride (16) have also shown partial success in encap-
sulation in hydrophobic polymers based nano-carriers,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s11095-013-1084-6) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.
D. Chitkara: N. Kumar (*)
Department of Pharmaceutics
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER)
Sector 67, S.A.S Nagar, Punjab 160 062, India
e-mail: kumarnk31@gmail.com
Pharm Res (2013) 30:2396–2409
DOI 10.1007/s11095-013-1084-6

however, this is largely dependent on the decrease in solu-
bility of the drug by varying pH of external phase during
encapsulation. It has been reported that doxorubicin is
more soluble in acidic form in comparison to its neutral
form and thus nanoformulation prepared by neutral form
resulted in higher drug loading (0.92%) than the cationic
form of the drug (0.65%), still desired encapsulation was not
achieved (14). The higher encapsulation was also achieved
using ion-pairing or complexation with the polyanions, but
was only applicable to charged molecules. Chavanpatil et al.
have
demonstrated
(17–19)
that
aerosol
OT-alginate
nanoparticles could be used for encapsulating basic, water
soluble drugs such as doxorubicin and verapamil while
acidic drugs such as fluorescein and diclofenac showed poor
drug loadings (20). Vrignaud et al. (21) have reviewed the
strategies for encapsulating hydrophilic molecules in poly-
mer based nanoparticles with the advantages and drawbacks
of each system indicating a clear need to develop a carrier
system which could be used for delivering hydrophilic small
molecular weight drugs.
In search of new carrier systems, core-shell nanoparticles
have shown a great potential to overcome such problems since
they provide greater flexibility in designing due to their hybrid
nature (22–24). Core-shell nanoparticles either are prepared
using inorganic materials which may pose the problem of
material accumulation in the body or are prepared for larger
biomolecules like DNA which requires very low loading of
active molecule (22,25,26). Delivery of small/medium hydro-
philic molecules still remains challenging. Arias et al. have
prepared magnetite/poly(alkylcyanoacrylate) (PACA) core-
shell
nanoparticles
for
delivery
of
5-fluorouracil
(27).
Magnetite forms core of the particles which is surrounded by
the polymeric shell of PACA containing the drug. The entire
drug got released within 3 h from this system. In the present
study, core-shell nanoparticles with hydrophilic core using
BSA surrounded by hydrophobic shell made of PLGA are
prepared as a carrier system for delivering gemcitabine as a
potential water-soluble model drug. The hydrophilic core
provided suitable environment for encapsulation of hydro-
philic low molecular weight drug while the hydrophobic shell
served to control its release from the system.
Gemcitabine is a deoxycytidine analog with a molecular
weight
of
299.66
g/mol
and
high
water
solubility
(~38 mg/ml), and is approved for use in humans against
non-small cell lung cancer, pancreatic, ovarian, bladder and
breast cancer either alone or in combination with other anti-
cancer agents (28). A major limitation associated with this
molecule is its rapid metabolism in the plasma to inactive
metabolite difluoro deoxyuridine (dFdU) offsetting its poten-
tial as an effective anti-neoplastic agent. Various approaches
have been explored for delivering gemcitabine which include
in-situ gel forming systems (29), liposomes (30), polymer drug
conjugates (31) and nanoparticles (32,33). Owing to its low
molecular weight and high water solubility, gemcitabine has a
tendency to diffuse out from any nano-carrier system. Further,
unlike other molecules such as doxorubicin, its solubility does
not vary significantly on changing the pH of the solution.
Gemcitabine hydrochloride salt has a solubility of 38 mg/ml
while its base form has solubility of 22 mg/ml (unpublished
data) which is still high for achieving encapsulation in nano-
carrier system. In comparison to this, doxorubicin hydrochlo-
ride has a water solubility of 10 mg/ml which decreases
appreciably on increasing pH enabling its encapsulation into
a nano-carrier. Furthermore, gemcitabine does not carry any
charged group, thus, ion pairing method could not be used for
enhancing its encapsulation. It is having a log p of −1.4
indicating its high affinity to the water phase. Thus, none of
the available formulation strategies are successful for delivery
of gemcitabine at desired level and it is still delivered through
infusion at commercial level. Thus, there is need to develop a
delivery system for gemcitabine which can overcome the
problems associated with these molecules.
Present study focuses on the development and in vitro
evaluation of core-shell nanoparticles as hydrophilic drug
carrier systems where bovine serum albumin (BSA) is used
as the hydrophilic core containing gemcitabine surrounded
by PLGA as the hydrophobic shell. These core-shell
nanoparticles were prepared by double emulsion method
and optimized for particle size and encapsulation efficiency.
Formulations were characterized using TEM, confocal mi-
croscopy, XRD and DSC, and drug release was assessed in
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) followed by in vitro evalua-
tion in MG-63 osteosarcoma cell line. Qualitative uptake of
the core-shell nanoparticles by the cells was studied using
confocal microscopy and TEM and quantitative uptake was
studied by analyzing the drug taken up by the cells with
time. Drug loaded core-shell nanoparticles were then tested
for efficacy in MG-63 cell line using MTT assay.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Gemcitabine HCl was obtained as a kind gift from SMS
Pharma (Hyderabad, India). PLGA was synthesized in house
by ring opening polymerization of DL-lactide (PURAC,
Germany) and glycolide (PURAC, Germany) (Mw- 90
KDa, Mn- 50 KDa, PDI- 1.78, lactide to glycolide ratio-
2.6:1). GEMCITE® was purchase from EliLilly and Co.
India Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon, India. Aerosol OT-100 was pur-
chased from Loba Chemie Pvt. Ltd. (Mumbai, India) and
was dried prior to use. BSA was purchased from Sisco
Research Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (New Delhi, India). All
other chemicals were of analytical grade and used as
obtained without further purification.
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2397

Methods
Preparation and Optimization Core-Shell Nanoparticles
Core-shell nanoparticles were prepared by modified double-
emulsion (W1/O/W2) solvent evaporation method (34). In
this method, internal water phase (W1) consisted of BSA and
gemcitabine to form the core of the particle. Whereas,
PLGA was dissolved in dichloromethane (DCM) as organic
phase (O) to form the shell of the particle and aerosol OT-
100 (2% w/v) was also added which served as a surfactant to
stabilize W1/O emulsion. The outer aqueous phase (W2)
consisted of polyvinyl alcohol (1% w/v) to stabilize the
W1/O/W2 double emulsion. Sonication of the emulsion
was performed at controlled amplitude of 80 for 1 min to
reduce droplet size in the nano-size range.
For the preparation of nanoparticles, BSA (25 mg) and
gemcitabine hydrochloride (5 mg) were dissolved in double
distilled water (500 μl) and pH was adjusted to 8.5 using
potassium hydroxide (0.5 M) to form the W1 internal phase.
It was then added to organic phase (O) consisted of DCM
(5 ml) containing PLGA (100 mg) and aerosol OT-100
(2% w/v) with stirring at 1200 rpm followed by sonication
at 80 amplitude for 1 min to form W1/O emulsion.
Sonication step was necessary to reduce the droplet size of
the W1/O emulsion. To this emulsion, glutaraldehyde
(0.25 mmol) was added and allowed to stir for 30 min at
1200 rpm. During this step, glutaraldehyde being water
soluble molecule, will diffuse into the internal aqueous phase
leading to stabilization of BSA by cross-linking. The formed
W1/O emulsion was then added to outer aqueous phase,
W2 which consisted of polyvinyl alcohol solution, (1% w/v;
25 ml; aqueous phase) with stirring at 500 rpm to form
W1/O/W2 double emulsion. The double emulsion was
sonicated at amplitude of 80 for 1 min to reduce droplet
size, followed by evaporation of organic phase (O) under
vacuum to form core-shell nanoparticles. Nanoparticles
were then centrifuged at 25,000 g for 5 min and washed
with double distilled water to remove the free drug and
adsorbed PVA from the surface of core-shell nanoparticles.
Various process parameters (Table I) for nanoparticles prep-
aration were optimized with respect to particle size and
encapsulation efficiency.
Characterization of Core-Shell Nanoparticles
Particle Size and Size Distribution. Particle size and size dis-
tribution (PDI) of core-shell nanoparticles was determined
using Zeta sizer (Malvern ZS, UK). Core-shell nanoparticles
were dispersed in double distilled water and measurements
were carried out in triplicate taking an average of 5 mea-
surements. Zeta potential of core-shell nanoparticles was
measured on the basis of electrophoretic mobility of
nanoparticles under an electric field and was carried out in
triplicate, each being an average of 30 measurements.
Drug Loading and Encapsulation Efficiency. For this purpose,
core-shell nanoparticles suspension was centrifuged and
dried under vacuum for 48 h. Weighed amount of the pellet
was taken in a vial to which double distilled water was added
and sonicated for 5 min at 80 amplitude to extract
gemcitabine. The sample was filtered and drug content in
the filtrate was determined by HPLC-UV analytical method
at λmax 268 nm using sodium acetate buffer (20 mM; pH-
5.5) and methanol as mobile phase at a flow rate of 1 ml/min
on Inertsil® ODS 3 column (4.6×250 mm; 5 μ). Drug
loading and encapsulation efficiency were calculated using
the following formulae:
Drug loading ¼ Amount of drug encapsulated
Total weight of nanoparticles  100
ð1Þ
Encapsulation Efficiency ¼ Amount of drug encapsulated
Total amount of drug taken  100 ð2Þ
Morphology of Core-Shell Nanoparticles
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
TEM was used to determine the core–shell structure and
shape of prepared nanoparticles. For this purpose, sample
containing nanoparticles (10 μl) was appropriately diluted
with double distilled water, loaded onto the copper grid
(Formavar coated), allowed to dry in air followed by staining
with phosphotungstic acid (2% w/v solution) and then ex-
amined using Technai® TEM F20 (FEITM, OR, USA) at
an accelerating voltage of 160 kV.
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
In this study, fluorescent labeled micron sized particles were
prepared using similar procedure as that of core-shell
nanoparticles except for the sonication step, to obtain par-
ticles in micron size range needed for visualization in con-
focal laser scanning microscope. In this process, FITC
labeled BSA was used to get fluorescent core. For this,
BSA solution (10 mg/ml in bicarbonate buffer (100 mM:
pH-9.0)) was prepared to which FITC solution (1 mg/ml in
DMSO) was continuously added in small increments and
allowed to stir for 8 h in dark. The solution was then
dialyzed against purified water through 2000 Da cut-off
membrane to remove free FITC and the FITC conjugated
BSA was freeze dried using Virtis freeze dryer (Wizard 2.0).
2398
Chitkara and Kumar

DSC and XRD Analysis
DSC thermograms of gemcitabine, PLGA, BSA, gemcitabine
loaded core-shell nanoparticles, blank core-shell nanoparticles
were obtained using a Perkin Elmer DSC instrument
calibrated with Indium standards. For this purpose, core-shell
nanoparticle suspension was centrifuged and pellet obtained
was dried under vacuum for 48 h. Accurately weighed sam-
ples (4–6 mg) were sealed into standard aluminium pans and
scanned from −10°C to 300°C at a heating rate of 10°C/min
under inert atmosphere.
XRD
analysis
of
gemcitabine
loaded
core-shell
nanoparticles was performed to ascertain the nature of
the entrapped drug. For this purpose, dried samples of
gemcitabine, PLGA, BSA, gemcitabine loaded core-shell
nanoparticles and blank core-shell nanoparticles were
analyzed
using
powder
XRD
(Bruker
axs
D8,
Germany).
Evaluation of Core-Shell Nanoparticles
In Vitro Drug Release Study
For this purpose, a dialysis bag (Molecular weight cutoff
10,000 Da) method was used wherein nanoparticle suspen-
sion (5 ml) was taken inside the dialysis bag which was then
tied from both ends. This bag containing nanoparticles was
then placed in vials containing release media (PBS; 20 ml;
pH 7.4 and 5.5). . These vials were incubated in reciprocal
shaking water bath maintained at 37°C/100 rpm. During
incubation,
gemcitabine
was
released
from
the
nanoparticles and crosses the dialysis membrane to reach
into the external media. At regular time intervals, 1 ml of
external release medium was withdrawn and replaced with
same amount of fresh medium. Amount of the drug released
was then analyzed in the samples by using HPLC-UV
method and percent cumulative release was plotted v/s
time. In order to elucidate the mechanism of gemcitabine
release form the core-shell nanoparticles, the release curves
were fitted into different kinetic models such as zero order,
first order, Higuchi model, Hixon-Crowell, and Baker-
Lonsdale model. Best goodness-of-fit was determined from
the linear regression co-efficient obtained from the model
fitting of the data.
In Vitro Cell Culture Studies
Cell Culture and Maintenance
MG-63 (osteosarcoma cell line) was obtained from National
Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune, India. It was
maintained at 37°C / 5% CO2 in growth medium
containing Dulbecco’s Modified Eagel’s Medium (DMEM,
Biological Industries) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum and 1% Antibiotics (Penicillin (100 IU/ml), strepto-
mycin (100 μg/ml) and amphotericin B (2.5 mg/ml);
Calbiochem, Germany).
Cell Uptake Study of Fluorescent Core-Shell Nanoparticles
Using Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
To
study
the
cell
uptake,
fluorescent
core-shell
nanoparticles were prepared using above mentioned
method by replacing drug with a fluorescent dye (cou-
marin-6). Since coumerin-6 is a hydrophobic molecule
and thus 1 mg of coumarin-6 was added to the DCM
phase during preparation step. MG-63 cells (3×104)
were seeded in 35 mm petri-dishes and allowed to attach
for 24 h at 37°C/5% CO2. After 24 h, the cells were
incubated with coumarin-6 loaded core-shell nanoparticles
for 2 h followed by washing of the cells for three times with
PBS (pH 7.4). Washed cells were fixed using formaldehyde
solution
(4%
v/v),
permeabilized
using
triton
X-100
(0.1% w/v) and labeled with propidium iodide dye to stain
the nucleus. After staining, cells were washed thrice with PBS
(pH 7.4) and analyzed using confocal laser scanning
microscopy.
Cell Uptake Study of Core-Shell Nanoparticles Using TEM
Cells (2.5×105) were seeded in 25 cm2 cell culture flask and
incubated at
37°C/5%CO2 for 24 h to allow
cell
Table I Parameters for Optimization of Gemcitabine Loaded Core-Shell Nanoparticles
S.No.
Variable parameter
Levels
Remarks
Optimized value
1
BSA content (mg)
25, 50 and 75
Effects core size
25
2
PLGA content (mg)
50, 100 and 150
Varies the shell thickness; controls drug release
100
3
Glutaraldehyde amount (mmol)
0.125, 0.25 and 0.5
Stabilization of core
0.25
4
Drug content (mg)
2.5, 5 and 10
Affects pay load
5
5
Aerosol OTconcentration (% w/v)
1, 2 and 3
Affects W1/O emulsion stability
2
6
PVA concentration (% w/v)
0.5, 1 and 2
Affects W1/O/W2 emulsion stability
1
7
DCM Volume (ml)
2.5, 5 and 10
Affects droplet size
5
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2399

attachment. Attached cells were further incubated with
predetermined amount of core-shell nanoparticles for 2 h
and washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4). Cells were then
trypsinized and fixed with glutaraldehyde (3% w/v) solution
for 30 min followed by repeated washings with PBS (pH 7.4)
and staining with osmium tetroxide solution (2% w/v) for
15 min. Cells were then washed with PBS and dehydrated
using acetone:PBS mixture wherein, acetone ratio was grad-
ually increased for 10% to 100%. Cells were then embed-
ded into a low viscosity embedding media (Electron
Microscopy Sciences, PA) consisting of noneyl succinic
anhydride
modified
(NSA),
DER
736
epoxy
resin
W.P.E. 184, ERL-4221 (3,4-epoxycyclohexane methyl
3′,4′-epoxycyclohexyl-carboxylate) and DMAE (2-(Dimethyl
amino)ethanol) and kept at 70°C for 24 h for solidification.
60 nm thick sections were then cut using PowerTome
Ultramicrotome (RMC products, USA) and loaded onto
copper grids. Samples were then stained with uranyl
acetate and observed under TEM at an accelerating
voltage of 160 kV.
Quantitative Cell Uptake Study of Core-Shell Nanoparticles
Cells were seeded into 24 well cell culture plates (3×104
cells/well) and incubated for 24 h to allow cell attachment.
After 24 h, media was removed and fresh media containing
GEMCITE® (marketed formulation of gemcitabine) or
gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles at equivalent
drug concentration were added. At specific time points,
media was removed and cells were washed with PBS
(pH 7.4). The cellular uptake was analyzed indirectly by
determining the amount of gemcitabine remaining in the
media and washings by HPLC-UV analytical method and
graphs of gemcitabine uptaken by the cells versus time were
plotted.
In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assay
Cells (1×104 cells/well) were seeded in 96-well cell culture
plates containing DMEM with 10% FBS as medium and
incubated at 37°C/5%CO2. After 24 h of incubation, the
medium was replaced with 100 μl of the fresh medium
containing different concentrations (0.1 to 100 μM) of
GEMCITE®
(marketed
formulation
of
gemcitabine),
gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles or blank core-
shell nanoparticles and incubated for 24, 48, or 72 h. At
each time point, cell viability was determined by MTT
assay.
For
MTT
assay,
working
solution
of
MTT
(0.5 mg/ml) in PBS (pH-7.4) was prepared and added to
each well and incubated for 4 h. After incubation, media
was removed, formed formazan crystals were dissolved in
DMSO and sample absorbance was measured with an
ELISA microplate reader at 570 nm after correction for cell
debris at 630 nm. Cell viability (%) was calculated with
respect to control using the following equation:
Cell viability %
ð
Þ ¼ Sample Absorbance
Control Absorbance  100
ð3Þ
Statistical Analysis
All results are expressed as mean±standard deviation.
Statistical significances between data sets was determined
by student t-test with a P value of <0.05 considered as
statistically significant.
RESULTS
Proof of Concept for the Formation of Core-Shell
Structure of Nanoparticles
Visualization Studies for the Core-Shell Structure
For this purpose, two studies were conducted using confocal
laser scanning microscopy and transmission electron microsco-
py. In case of confocal studies, it was difficult to visualize the
core-shell structure in nano range due to limitation of the
instrument and thus florescent micron size range particles were
prepared to enable direct observation of the prepared core-
shell structure. However, visualization of nano size range par-
ticles was possible using TEM analysis and thus this analysis was
performed using actual drug loaded core-shell nanoparticles.
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopystudies
To visualize the formation of hydrophilic core and hydropho-
bic shell, FITC tagged BSA was loaded in the core and core-
shell particles were visualized in confocal microscope by
Z-sectioning where green color represented the core and dark
circle surrounding the green color represents the shell of the
particle. Figure 1a shows confocal photomicrographs of core-
shell particles with all the particles having green fluorescence
in the core (Fig. 1a (i)) whereas Z-sectioning (Fig. 1a (ii)) of a
single particle indicated the green florescence of the core is
surrounded by a darker hydrophobic shell made of colorless
PLGA. As this study was to confirm the formation of core and
shell within a particle in micron size range and thus, no further
experiments were performed using this technique.
Transmission Electron Microscopy Studies
TEM studies can be used for visualization of particles in
nano size range and also for quantitative size measurement.
This technique can differentiate the regions of different
materials and thus does not require fluorescent tagging.
2400
Chitkara and Kumar

The difference in the material density also provides the
inputs on its localization in the sample. Thus, TEM images
captured at 5000X magnification (Fig. 1b (i)) showed that
the core-shell nanoparticles were spherical and nano-meter
sized. On further magnification at 50,000 X (Fig. 1b (ii)), the
core-shell structure was clearly visible with core being more
electron dense as compared to shell. Thickness of the outer
shell was measured as 5–10 nm.
Characterization of Core-Shell Nanoparticles as a Drug Carrier
In order to assess the suitability of the developed core-shell
nanoparticles as a hydrophilic drug carrier, a model drug
molecule, gemcitabine, was selected and process was optimized
for particle size and drug encapsulation. Total seven process
variables were studied as shown in Table I and their effects on
particle size and encapsulation efficiency are depicted in Fig. 2.
The matrix of core-shell nanoparticles consisted of two
polymers, BSA (as core-forming polymer) and PLGA (as shell
forming polymer). In this method, initially aqueous core is
formed using BSA as a matrix by W1/O single emulsion and
is stabilized using surfactant and cross-linking by glutaralde-
hyde followed by constructing a coat of PLGA as hydrophobic
shell using W1/O/W2 double emulsion. The amount of both
polymers can significantly affect the size and encapsulation of
the drug in the formulation thus their contents were optimized
using the parameters as depicted in Table I. On increasing
BSA amount from 10 mg to 25 mg, particle size was increased
from 185 nm to 231 nm whereas encapsulation efficiency
increased from 6% to 21.5%, however, no further significant
change was observed on both the parameters at albumin
content of 50 mg. At PLGA content of 50, 100 and 150 mg,
particle size was found to be 210, 243 and 311 nm, respectively
while encapsulation efficiency first increased from 5.8% to
40.5% and then decreased to 36.4% at 150 mg PLGA content.
Glutaraldehyde was used for crosslinking of encapsulated BSA
Fig. 1 Visual images of core-shell nanoparticles. (a) Confocal microscopy images of micron sized core-shell particles using BSA tagged with FITC i) overlay
of DIC and fluorescent image, ii) Z-sectioning of single particle from top to bottom, iii) 3D view of single particle, (b) TEM images of gemcitabine loaded
core-shell nanoparticles at magnification i) 5 K ii) 50 K, (c) FFT view of the single core-shell nanoparticle in TEM.
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2401

to stabilize the core of the particle which also affects the particle
size. At glutaraldehyde concentration of 0.125, 0.25 and
0.5 mmol, particle size was found to be 200, 243 and
500 nm with a PDI 0.17, 0.14 and 0.64 respectively.
Similarly, encapsulation efficiency was increased from 21 to
40.5%, thereafter decreased to 30% at 200 μl glutaraldehyde
concentration. Core-shell nanoparticles prepared without glu-
taraldehyde showed a particle size and encapsulation efficiency
of 194.2 nm (PDI-0.14) and 5.7%, respectively.
A model drug gemcitabine was encapsulated in the core of
the particle along with BSA and effect of varying drug concen-
tration on size and encapsulation efficiency was observed.
When the initial gemcitabine content was increased from
2.5 mg to 10 mg, particle size increased from 222.1 to
290.6 nm, however, encapsulation efficiency initially increased
from 31.4 to 40.5% on increasing drug content from 2.5 mg to
5 mg and thereafter, decreased to 20.1% at 10 mg.
Effect of changing volume of organic phase in W1/O/W2
emulsion was assessed by varying the volume of DCM from
2.5 ml to 10 ml. In this study, particle size increased from
230.7 to 285.2 nm while encapsulation efficiency initially
increased with increasing DCM from 2.5 to 5 ml and there-
after decreased at 10 ml of DCM. Formation of stable emul-
sions (W1/O and W1/O/W2) was necessary to obtain core-
shell structure and thus, two surfactants were used in the
preparation method. If the formed emulsions are not stable
then there are chances of formation of PLGA particles without
any core of BSA. Thus, Aerosol-OT and PVA surfactants
were used in organic and outer aqueous phase, respectively,
to stabilize the emulsion and their concentration can also
affect the droplet size. A decrease in particle size was observed
on increasing the aerosol OT concentration whereas the
encapsulation efficiency initially increased and then decreased
on further increasing aerosol OT concentration. PVA is used
Fig. 2 Effect of process parameters as given in Table I on encapsulation efficiency and particles size of gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles.
2402
Chitkara and Kumar

as surfactant in external aqueous phase to stabilize the
W1/O/W2 double emulsion. Particle size was found to be
increased from 227.1 to 339.1 nm with increasing PVA con-
centration from 0.5 to 2% w/v, however encapsulation effi-
ciency initially increased from 30 to 40.5% as PVA
concentration was increased from 0.5 to 1% and further
remained constant at higher concentration (2% w/v) of
PVA. Smallest particle size obtained during optimization of
core-shell nanoparticles was 185 nm, however, gemcitabine
encapsulation efficiency was only 6% at this particle size.
Although, small sized particles should have better therapeutic
use but these small sized particles have shown low encapsula-
tion efficiency of the gemcitabine and thus, were not taken
forward for efficacy testing. Highest encapsulation efficiency
of 40.5% was obtained at a particle size of 243 nm with a drug
loading of 8.5% w/w and this formulation was taken forward
for further studies. All the optimized parameters for the final
formulation are summarized in Table I.
Solid State Characterization of Gemcitabine in Core-Shell
Nanoparticles
The state of the drug in core-shell nanoparticles was assessed
using DSC and XRD techniques. Free form of gemcitabine is
crystalline in nature and DSC studies revealed that free
gemcitabine showed an endothermic melting peak at 270°C
followed by an exothermic peak corresponding to its degrada-
tion. This melting peak is absent in DSC thermogram of drug
loaded core-shell nanoparticles while a small endothermic
peak appeared at 55°C corresponding to glass transition tem-
perature of PLGA component of core-shell nanoparticles
(Supplementary Material Fig. S1). In XRD analysis, free
gemcitabine showed several sharp peaks corresponding to
the
crystalline
regions
of
gemcitabine
(Supplementary
Material Fig. S2). However, in gemcitabine loaded core-shell
nanoparticles, a hallow pattern was obtained without any
crystalline regions indicating the amorphous nature of the
encapsulated gemcitabine. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) view
of the single drug loaded nanoparticle using TEM was also
captured to predict the nature of the entrapped drug. Circular
rings were obtained in the FFT view (Fig. 1c) without any
bright spots on the rings indicating amorphous nature of the
loaded gemcitabine, and circular view indicates the hydro-
phobic regions at the periphery due to the presence of PLGA
shell in the nanoparticles.
Evaluation of Core-Shell Nanoparticles as a Drug Carrier
For any drug carrier system to be effective, it is important to
have a desired drug release from the carrier, drug/carrier
uptake in the cells/tissues with maximum cytotoxicity/toxicity
at disease site, but minimum to the normal cells. Thus, pre-
pared carrier system was evaluated for drug release properties,
drug/carrier uptake in a cancer cell line (MG-63) and efficacy
with respect to cytotoxicity to the cells.
In Vitro Drug Release Study
In vitro drug release study was performed to assess the ability of
the core-shell nanoparticles to control the release of
gemcitabine. These studies were conducted at pH 5.5 and
7.4 to mimic the tumor microenvironment and physiological
conditions, respectively. In the present formulation, a con-
trolled release of gemcitabine was observed for 12 h as shown
in Fig. 3. At 5.5 pH, drug release was observed to be faster
where 45% of gemcitabine was released in first 1 h thereafter
drug release was continued till 12 h with a cumulative drug
release of 85%. At pH 7.4, drug release was comparatively
slower than at pH 5.5 where 20% of the drug was released in
first 1 h followed by a slow release upto 12 h with a cumulative
release of 60%. Drug release experiments were conducted in a
dialysis membrane and thus it was also studied if there is any
obstacle to the passage of the free drug from the membrane to
bulk solution. Thus, the release of free drug to the bulk phase
was studied and observed that there was a complete drug
release to the bulk phase within 2 h where, 80% of the drug
diffused to bulk phase in just 30 min. Model fitting of the drug
release kinetics showed best fit in Higuchi model with R2 value
of 0.949 and 0.892 at pH 5.5 and 7.4, respectively.
Cell Uptake of Core-Shell Nanoparticles
The cellular uptake of core-shell nanoparticles was evaluat-
ed qualitatively using visual techniques confocal microscopy
and TEM; and quantitatively by analyzing gemcitabine
content taken-up by the cells after incubation with drug
Fig. 3 In vitro release profile of gemcitabine from core-shell nanoparticles
at pH 5.5 and 7.4.
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2403

loaded nanoparticles using HPLC assay of gemcitabine.
Qualitative analysis by confocal microscopy revealed that
core-shell nanoparticles were efficiently taken-up by MG-63
cells within 2 h as depicted by green fluorescence (Fig. 4b).
Further, to overcome the artifact of green fluorescence due
to surface bound core shell nanoparticles, cells were counter
stained with propidium iodide and optical sectioning was
performed. It was observed that both red fluorescence (from
propidium iodide) and green fluorescence (from C6 loaded
nanoparticles) were present at the same optical plane
(Fig. 4c) confirming the presence of nanoparticles inside
the cells. Fig. 4d shows the overlap of green/red fluores-
cence. Co-localization (Fig. 4e) of green fluorescence of C6
and red fluorescence of PI was determined on six region of
interests (ROIs) and pearson’s co-efficient was found to be
0.6595. This indicated that both dyes are in partial co-
relation for localization in cell. Line analysis was performed
on the magnified overlay image (Fig. 4f) which showed that
partial overlap of the signals of C6 and PI on the selected
line passing through the length of single cell (Fig. 4g), how-
ever it is clearly visible that red fluorescence of PI is localized
at the nucleus of the cell and green fluorescence of C6 is
visible in the whole cell. That is the probable reason that
pearson’s co-efficient is less than 1.0 where value of 1.0
indicates for complete correlation of both dyes. TEM anal-
ysis (Fig. 4h) also revealed that the core-shell nanoparticles
were taken up by the cells and were located in the cytoplasm
of the cells within 2 h. Figure 4i shows the gemcitabine
uptake (%) when cells were incubated with marketed for-
mulation of gemcitabine (GEMCITE®) or equivalent
gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles. The cell up-
take was found to be time dependent and increased with
Fig. 4 Cell uptake of core-shell nanoparticles in MG-63 cell line by confocal microscopy (a, b, c, e, f, g) and TEM (h) and HPLC assay (i) (a) DIC image,
(b) Coumarin-6 loaded core-shell nanoparticles in cells (Green color), (c) Cells (after fixing) stained with propidium iodide (red color), (d) Overlay of a, b, and
c, (e) Pixel wise co-localization analysis, (f and g) line analysis of co-localization, (h) MG63 Cells after 2 h of incubation with gemcitabine loaded core-shell
nanoparticles in TEM. Arrows represent gemcitabine core-shell nanoparticles within the cells. (i) Quantitative uptake (%) of gemcitabine in MG-63 cells
using GEMCITE® and gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles. Gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles (*p<0.001, ** p<0.05 v/s GEMCITE®)
showed significantly higher uptake than the GEMCITE®.
2404
Chitkara and Kumar

incubation
time.
Further,
it
was
observed
that
the
gemcitabine uptake in 1 h from core-shell nanoparticles
was significantly higher (52%) than that of GEMCITE®
(27%).
Cytotoxicity Evaluation in MG-63 Cell Line
To
evaluate
the
efficacy
of
drug
loaded
core-shell
nanoparticles, MG-63 osteo-sarcoma cells were incubated
with different molar concentrations of drug loaded core-shell
nanoparticles and GEMCITE® at 24, 48 and 72 h and
cytotoxicity assays were performed as shown in Fig. 5. Blank
core-shell nanoparticles were also studied at equivalent
amount to that of gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles
to evaluate the toxicity of the blank formulation. It was ob-
served that the gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles
were highly cytotoxic than GEMCITE® formulation at all
the studied time points (Table II). Mean inhibitory concentra-
tion (IC50) in case of GEMCITE® was reached only on third
day
while
in
case
of
gemcitabine
loaded
core-shell
nanoparticles it was achieved on the first day. Further at
Fig. 5 Cytotoxicity of GEMCITE® and Gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles in MG-63 cells. Gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles
showed statistically significant lower cell viability as compared to GEMCITE® indicating the enhanced efficacy of the core-shell nanoparticles (#p<0.01, @p<
0.001 v/s GEMCITE®).
Table II Cytotoxicity of Gemcitabine Loaded Core-Shell Nanoparticles
and GEMCITE® in MG-63 Cell Line
Formulation
IC 50 (μM) in MG-63 cell line
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Gemcitabine loaded
core-shell nanoparticles
27.4
11.2
1.5
GEMCITE®
#
#
2.0
# IC50 values could not be achieved
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2405

higher concentration levels, gemcitabine loaded core-shell
nanoparticles resulted in much reduced cell viability as com-
pared to GEMCITE® (1.5% versus 43.3% at 100 μM con-
centration). Furthermore, blank core-shell nanoparticles did
not show any cytotoxic effect to MG-63 cells.
DISCUSSION
Several hydrophilic drugs have shown remarkable therapeu-
tic benefit but their delivery is limited to conventional de-
livery strategies which result in poor patient compliance. On
the other hand, designing carrier systems for these molecules
is even more challenging due to their high water solubility.
Efforts have been made to encapsulate these hydrophilic
molecules into nano-carriers by varying pH conditions to
decrease the drug solubility or using counter-ions to form
comparatively less soluble drug complexes. Such strategies
are largely dependent on the drug properties (such as pH
solubility profiles, ionization, etc.) which change the physico-
chemical profile of the native drug and thus affect the
efficacy/toxicity of drug molecule. Hence, there is a need
to develop a carrier system which can deliver hydrophilic
molecules independent of their physico-chemical properties
and more importantly retain their native therapeutic effica-
cy needed for effective treatment of the disease condition.
While developing such systems, particularly for hydrophilic
drugs, two important properties are needed i.e.; consider-
able payload of drug in the carrier of the desired size and its
release from the system to ensure the desired therapeutic
effect.
The present formulation of core-shell nanoparticles was
designed keeping in view both of these parameters. The
interior of the particles was made by hydrophilic polymer
matrix (BSA) to provide a suitable environment for encap-
sulating water soluble drugs while shell was formed by
hydrophobic polymer, PLGA, to control the release of the
drug from the system.
For successful design of such a system, it is the first and
foremost requirement to prove that core-shell structure is
achieved in the developed carriers. For this purpose, a proof
of concept was established by studying the formation of
core-shell structure using confocal microscopy (visual and
qualitative) and TEM (visual and quantitative) techniques as
shown in Fig. 1. For confocal analysis, fluorescent BSA was
obtained by tagging BSA with FITC and particles were
prepared where fluorescent BSA shows green fluorescence
in the core of the particles confirming its location in the
core-shell nanoparticles. These results support the proposed
hypothesis as BSA was taken in the internal water phase in
W1/O/W2 double emulsion method for the preparation of
core-shell nanoparticles. TEM images further confirmed
formation of the core-shell structure wherein electron-
dense core made of hydrophilic BSA was surrounded by a
5–10 nm thick shell of hydrophobic PLGA. In these parti-
cles, BSA core was very labile being hydrophilic in nature
and thus it was stabilized by crosslinking with glutaralde-
hyde which were further covered by PLGA shell using
W1/O/W2 double emulsion as seen in Fig. 1b (ii).
Glutaraldehyde ia a homobifunctional crosslinker consisted
of free aldehyde groups which can interact with the ε-amino
group of lysyl residues of the BSA via schiff base and/or
Michael-type addition reaction thereby resulting in inter-
and intra-chain cross-linking and hence, stabilization of
BSA. Further, drug loaded carriers were fabricated by load-
ing a hydrophilic model drug gemcitabine in BSA core
during the formulation of single emulsion and keeping other
steps same as discussed earlier. It resulted in the formation
of
gemcitabine
loaded
core-shell
nanoparticles
where
entrapped drug was observed to be amorphous in nature
as indicated by the absence of bright spots on the circular
rings in Fig. 1c, and by XRD (Fig. S1) and DSC (Fig. S2).
These results are in coherence with the previous report
showing conversion of crystalline drug to amorphous form
after encapsulation in the polymeric matrix due to molecu-
lar dispersion of drug in the inner core of the particles (35).
Prepared core-shell particles were optimized for size and
drug encapsulation based on seven required parameters as
shown in Table I. Although these parameters could affect the
core and shell properties such as their thickness which can
influence the stability and drug release properties, however,
particle size and encapsulation efficiency were selected as
primary response parameters for optimization of drug carrier
as both parameters dictate the therapeutic efficacy/toxicity of
the formulation at desired site of action for effective treatment
of the disease. A stepwise optimization of size and drug encap-
sulation of prepared particles was done based on 7 listed
parameters by varying one parameter at a time and keeping
others constant as shown in Table I. On increasing BSA
content, particle size was increased due to increasing core
volume and drug encapsulation was also increased. It is
reported that gemcitabine interacts with albumin via non-
covalent linkages during co-encapsulation (36) which might
also be the reason for obtaining higher encapsulation of
gemcitabine at higher BSA content. To minimize the drug
release from BSA matrix/droplet at double emulsion stage,
glutaraldehyde was added to W1/O single emulsion so that
BSA matrix/droplet can be stabilized by crosslinking with
glutaraldehyde and the release of hydrophilic drug into aque-
ous media can be minimized at double emulsion stage.
Glutaraldehyde is slouble in both water and DCM, thus it
could be added either in the internal aqueous phase (W1) or
after formation of W1/O emulsion. However, it was observed
that addition of glutaraldehyde in W1 leads to aggregation of
BSA and hence, for successful formulation of nanoparticles, it
was added in the W1/O emulsion. It is observed that
2406
Chitkara and Kumar

increasing glutaraldehyde concentration enhances the encap-
sulation efficiency of gemcitabine and particle size of the core-
shell nanoparticles was also enhanced. Increasing particles size
and drug encapsulation also indicate that higher amount of
glutaraldehyde lead to higher interaction between albumin
chains (both intra and inter-molecular) leading to formation
of larger albumin aggregates in the core, thereby increasing the
particle size as well as PDI. Further, it is expected that GTA
can affect the core properties and can lead to collapse of the
core. In the present study, it was observed that higher GTA
concentration (i.e. above 0.5 mmol) results in aggregation and
precipitation of BSA during W1/O emulsion stage. On in-
creasing PLGA content in the DCM phase at double emulsion
stage, particle size was further increased which could be due to
the increased viscosity of the DCM phase (37) thereby increas-
ing the droplet size in the double emulsion. This increased
viscosity may reduce the diffusion of drug to the external phase
resulting in an increase in encapsulation efficiency. On increas-
ing the amount of gemcitabine from 2.5 mg to 5 mg in the
feed, particle size and encapsulation efficiency also increased
due to the increased core volume, however at higher
gemcitabine content (10 mg), encapsulation efficiency again
decreased due to limiting holding capacity of the polymeric
matrix. It is observed that all the above tested parameters had
increased the particle size of the formulation and thus it was
necessary to reduce the particle size so that desired size can be
achieved. For this purpose, surfactants were used as they can
reduce the droplet size of emulsion during the preparation
process and thereby can reduce the size of final formulation.
It is also important to note that in the current formulation two
heterogeneous
matrices
are
used
to
form
core-shell
nanoparticles and thus two different surfactants are necessary
to stabilized both matrices and thus aerosol OT as a hydro-
phobic surfactant was employed to stabilize the W1/O single
emulsion and PVA as a hydrophilic surfactant was taken in the
outer aqueous phase for stabilizing W1/O/W2 emulsion.
During the preparation of the formulation at higher PVA
concentration, particle size was increased due to increased
viscosity of the external phase and hence larger droplet size
was obtained resulting in bigger size of the particles (38,39). It is
also observed that organic phase volume does not affect the
particle size significantly on the tested values, however it
resulted in reduction of drug encapsulation efficiency.
After
the
proof
of
concept
and
characterization/
optimization of drug loaded core-shell nanoparticles, it is im-
portant to demonstrate that these drug carriers can release the
drug and can also be taken-up by the cells/tissue for desired
therapeutic effect. Gemcitabine is a hydrophilic molecule with
a water solubility of 38 mg/ml. Such high water solubility
poses challenge to control the release of the drug from carriers
which diffuses at a faster rate into the external aqueous envi-
ronment. In the present formulation, PLGA shell was used to
control the drug release from the hydrophilic core of BSA
within the core-shell nanoparticles. Due to the rapid metabo-
lism of gemcitabine in biological environment, it is also desir-
able to control the release of gemcitabine from the formulation
so that its metabolism by cytidine deaminase enzyme present in
plasma can be reduced and thereby it may result in higher
efficacy even at the lower dose of the formulation. Further, it is
reported in literature that a better anticancer activity of
gemcitabine can be achieved by prolonged IV infusion as
compared to bolus administration (40) and the same can be
achieved from a controlled release formulation like the present
formulation. In case of core-shell nanoparticles, sufficient time
would be available for the extravasation into the tumor com-
partment which is not in the case of free gemcitabine due to
faster metabolism in biological environment. A controlled
release for 12 h was obtained from the core-shell nanoparticles
which can be delivered through IV injection as a replacement
of continuous IV infusion. In this way, infusion can be avoided
and an enhanced efficacy can be achieved owing to its con-
trolled release/nanoparticulate nature. In the present study,
drug release pattern was studied in PBS at pH 7.4 and 5.5 to
mimic the physiological and tumor microenvironment, respec-
tively. A faster release of gemcitabine was observed at pH 5.5
in comparison to the pH 7.4 which further ensures the higher
release of drug in the tumor micro-environment than in the
physiological conditions and thus beneficial for faster treat-
ment. Drug release from nano-carriers generally occurs
through several mechanisms such as diffusion through the
polymeric matrix, release by polymer degradation and solubi-
lization, diffusion through micro-channels that exist in poly-
meric matrix or are generated during polymer hydration.
Further, gemcitabine release pattern showed best-fit in
Higuchi model indicating that the release is mainly governed
by the diffusion of the drug molecules. This is also expected
since gemcitabine being a hydrophilic molecule has a high
tendency for diffusion. Secondly, the outer shell is made up
of high molecular weight PLGA which is not expected to
undergo significant degradation during the initial 12 h.
However, there may be formation of diffusion channels in
the outer shell of PLGA leading to outward movement of drug
molecules. A rapid release of gemcitabine under acidic condi-
tions might have resulted from the faster creation of diffusion
channels in the outer PLGA shell due to hydration and cleav-
age of ester bonds under acidic environment. An initial burst
release of gemcitabine was observed from the nanoparticles
which could be due to the drug molecules adsorbed in the
PLGA shell and/or dispersing close to the nanoparticle sur-
face, which can rapidly diffuse in the initial incubation time.
In vitro efficacy of the formulation was tested in MG-63
cancer cells by studying their uptake to the cells and cytotoxic-
ity. In cancer cells, nanoparticles are generally uptaken via
energy driven endocytic pathway in a time and dose dependent
manner. These pathways may be categorized into clathrin-
mediated endocytosis, caveolae-mediated endocytosis, clathrin
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2407

and caveolae-independent endocytosis and macropinocytosis
(41). It has been reported that nanoparticles may initially get
associated with the membrane proteins and lipids, subsequent-
ly be delivered to the endocytic machinery, and finally, escape
from the endosomal compartments into cytoplasm. The effica-
cy could be greatly enhanced by using core-shell nanoparticles
due to higher surface energy of hydrophobic shell and release
of the therapeutic molecules directly in the vicinity to the cell
nucleus. In the present study, both confocal microscopy and
TEM techniques indicated that core-shell nanoparticles were
efficiently taken up by the cancer cells within 2 h and are
present in the vicinity of the nucleus. Further, higher uptake
of core-shell nanoparticles ensure higher uptake of gemcitabine
as compared to its marketed formulation which is given in
solution form. Gemcitabine uptake from solution relies mainly
on the active transport by nucleoside transporters present on
the cell membrane to enter the cell and reach the target site (42)
while gemcitabine loaded core-shell nanoparticles uptake is
majorly contributed by the endocytic pathway as mentioned
earlier. The enhanced cytotoxicity of gemcitabine loaded core-
shell nanoparticles could also be related to its more rapid and
enhanced uptake by the MG-63 cells.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, core-shell nanoparticles having a hydrophilic
core of BSA and hydrophobic shell of PLGA were devel-
oped as new carrier system for water-soluble drugs. The
proof of concept of core-shell nanoparticles and their
applicability for carrying the therapeutic payload was
established by taking gemcitabine as a water soluble mod-
el drug. These results clearly indicate the effectiveness of
the system in encapsulating gemcitabine with a desired
particle size, drug release profile and an efficacy in cell
culture model. The present core-shell nanoparticles have
the potential to load other hydrophilic molecules and
could be used as a promising platform for developing
nanomedicines of hydrophilic molecules for wider appli-
cations in drug delivery.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND DISCLOSURES
Financial support from the Department of Biotechnology,
India is gratefully acknowledged. Authors are thankful to
Department of Science and Technology, India for confocal
laser scanning microscope and TEM facilities at NIPER,
SAS Nagar. Ranbaxy Science Foundation (RSF), India is
duly acknowledged for recognizing this work by awarding
Ranbaxy Science Scholar Award-2011 to DC in the field of
Pharmaceutical sciences. Support from Dr. Anupama
Mittal in conducting cell culture experiments is duly
acknowledged.
REFERENCES
1. Allen TM, Cullis PR. Liposomal drug delivery systems: from
concept to clinical applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2012; In
press. doi:10.1016/j.addr.2012.09.037
2. Ayen WY, Garkhal K, Kumar N. Doxorubicin-loaded (PEG)(3)-
PLA nanopolymersomes: effect of solvents and process parameters
on formulation development and in vitro study. Mol Pharm.
2011;8(2):466–78.
3. Ayen WY, Chintankumar B, Jain JP, Kumar N. Effect of PEG
chain length and hydrophilic weight fraction on polymersomes
prepared from branched (PEG)3-PLA co-polymers. Polym Adv
Technol. 2011;22(1):158–65.
4. Jain JP, Kumar N. Self assembly of amphiphilic (PEG)(3)-PLA co-
polymer as polymersomes: preparation, characterization, and their
evaluation as drug carrier. Biomacromolecules. 2010;11(4):1027–35.
5. Ayen WY, Kumar N. In vivo evaluation of doxorubicin-loaded
(PEG)(3)-PLA nanopolymersomes (PolyDoxSome) using DMBA-
induced mammary carcinoma rat model and comparison with
marketed LipoDox. Pharm Res. 2012;29(9):2522–33.
6. Jeong Y-I, Cheon J-B, Kim S-H, Nah J-W, Lee Y-M, Sung Y-K, et
al. Clonazepam release from core-shell type nanoparticles in vitro.
J Control Release. 1998;51(2–3):169–78.
7. Chan JM, Zhang L, Yuet KP, Liao G, Rhee JW, Langer R, et al.
PLGA-lecithin-PEG core-shell nanoparticles for controlled drug
delivery. Biomaterials. 2009;30(8):1627–34.
8. Chitkara D, Singh S, Kumar V, Danquah M, Behrman SW,
Kumar N, et al. Micellar delivery of cyclopamine and Gefitinib
for treating pancreatic cancer. Mol Pharm. 2012;9(8):2350–7.
9. Chitkara D, Nikalaje SK, Mittal A, Chand M, Kumar N.
Development of quercetin nanoformulation and in vivo evaluation
using streptozotocin induced diabetic rat model. Drug Dev Trans
Res. 2012;2(2):112–23.
10. Lee JY, Lee SH, Oh MH, Kim JS, Park TG, Nam YS. Prolonged
gene silencing by siRNA/chitosan-g-deoxycholic acid polyplexes
loaded within biodegradable polymer nanoparticles. J Control
Release. 2012;162(2):407–13.
11. Steinbach JM, Weller CE, Booth CJ, Saltzman WM. Polymer
nanoparticles encapsulating siRNA for treatment of HSV-2 genital
infection. J Control Release. 2012;162(1):102–10.
12. Barichello
JM,
Morishita
M,
Takayama
K,
Nagai
T.
Encapsulation of hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs in PLGA
nanoparticles by the nanoprecipitation method. Drug Dev Ind
Pharm. 1999;25(4):471–6.
13. Zhang Z, Huey Lee S, Feng SS. Folate-decorated poly(lactide-co-
glycolide)-vitamin E TPGS nanoparticles for targeted drug deliv-
ery. Biomaterials. 2007;28(10):1889–99.
14. Tewes F, Munnier E, Antoon B, Ngaboni Okassa L, Cohen-
Jonathan
S,
Marchais
H,
et
al.
Comparative
study
of
doxorubicin-loaded poly(lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles pre-
pared by single and double emulsion methods. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm. 2007;66(3):488–92.
15. Leo E, Brina B, Forni F, Vandelli MA. In vitro evaluation of PLA
nanoparticles containing a lipophilic drug in water-soluble or
insoluble form. Int J Pharm. 2004;278(1):133–41.
16. Ubrich N, Bouillot P, Pellerin C, Hoffman M, Maincent P.
Preparation and characterization of propranolol hydrochloride
nanoparticles:
a
comparative
study.
J
Control
Release.
2004;97(2):291–300.
17. Khiati S, Luvino D, Oumzil K, Chauffert B, Camplo M,
Barthelemy P. Nucleoside-lipid-based nanoparticles for cisplatin
delivery. ACS Nano. 2011;5(11):8649–55.
18. Kashi TS, Eskandarion S, Esfandyari-Manesh M, Marashi SM,
Samadi N, Fatemi SM, et al. Improved drug loading and
antibacterial activity of minocycline-loaded PLGA nanoparticles
2408
Chitkara and Kumar

prepared
by
solid/oil/water
ion
pairing
method.
Int
J
Nanomedicine. 2012;7(1):221–34.
19. Cavalli R, Bargoni A, Podio V, Muntoni E, Zara GP, Gasco MR.
Duodenal administration of solid lipid nanoparticles loaded with
different percentages of tobramycin. J Pharm Sci. 2003;92(5):
1085–94.
20. Chavanpatil MD, Khdair A, Patil Y, Handa H, Mao G, Panyam J.
Polymer-surfactant nanoparticles for sustained release of water-
soluble drugs. J Pharm Sci. 2007;96(12):3379–89.
21. Vrignaud
S,
Benoit
JP,
Saulnier
P.
Strategies
for
the
nanoencapsulation of hydrophilic molecules in polymer-based
nanoparticles. Biomaterials. 2011;32(33):8593–604.
22. Chen Y, Chen H, Zeng D, Tian Y, Chen F, Feng J, et al. Core/
shell structured hollow mesoporous nanocapsules: a potential plat-
form for simultaneous cell imaging and anticancer drug delivery.
ACS Nano. 2010;4(10):6001–13.
23. Hu SH, Chen SY, Gao X. Multifunctional nanocapsules for si-
multaneous encapsulation of hydrophilic and hydrophobic com-
pounds and on-demand release. ACS Nano. 2012;6(3):2558–65.
24. Liu M, Gan L, Chen L, Xu Z, Zhu D, Hao Z, et al.
Supramolecular core-shell nanosilica@liposome nanocapsules for
drug delivery. Langmuir. 2012;28(29):10725–32.
25. Zhu J, Tang A, Law LP, Feng M, Ho KM, Lee DK, et al.
Amphiphilic core-shell nanoparticles with poly(ethylenimine) shells
as potential gene delivery carriers. Bioconjug Chem. 2005;16(1):
139–46.
26. Oh KS, Han SK, Lee HS, Koo HM, Kim RS, Lee KE, et al.
Core/shell nanoparticles with lecithin lipid cores for protein deliv-
ery. Biomacromolecules. 2006;7(8):2362–7.
27. Arias JL, Gallardo V, Ruiz MA, Delgado AV. Magnetite/
poly(alkylcyanoacrylate)
(core/shell)
nanoparticles
as
5-
fluorouracil delivery systems for active targeting. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm. 2008;69(1):54–63.
28. Reddy LH, Couvreur C. Novel approaches to deliver gemcitabine
to cancer. Curr Pharm Des. 2008;14(11):1124–37.
29. Okino H, Maeyama R, Manabe T, Matsuda T, Tanaka M. Trans-
tissue, sustained release of gemcitabine from photocured gelatin
Gel inhibits the growth of heterotopic human pancreatic tumor in
nude mice. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9(15):5786–93.
30. Celano M, Cavalgno MG, Bulotta S, Paolino D, Arturi F.
Cytotoxic effects of gemcitabine-loaded liposomes in human ana-
plastic thyroid carcinoma cells. BMC Cancer. 2004;4(1):63–70.
31. Cavallaro G, Mariano L, Salmaso S, Caliceti P, Gaetano G.
Folate-mediated targeting of polymeric conjugates of gemcitabine.
Int J Pharm. 2006;307(1–2):258–69.
32. Patra CR, Bhattacharya R, Wang E, Katarya A, Lau JS, Dutta S,
et al. Targeted delivery of gemcitabine to pancreatic adenocarci-
noma using cetuximab as a targeting agent. Cancer Res.
2008;68(6):1970–8.
33. Yang J, Park S-B, Yoon H-G, Huh Y-M, Haam S. Preparation of
poly caprolactone nanoparticles containing magnetite for magnetic
drug carrier. Int J Pharm. 2006;324(2):185–90.
34. Song C, Labhasetwar V, Cui X, Underwood T, Levy RJ. Arterial
uptake of biodegradable nanoparticles for intravascular local drug
delivery: results with an acute dog model. J Control Release.
1998;54(2):201–11.
35. Hosseinzadeh H, Atyabi F, Dinarvand R, Ostad SN. Chitosan-
pluronic nanoparticles as oral delivery of anticancer gemcitabine:
preparation and in vitro study. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;
7(1):1851–63.
36. Kandagal PB, Ashoka S, Seetharamappa J, Shaikh SMT,
Jadegoud Y, Ijare OB. Study of the interaction of an anticancer
drug with human and bovine serum albumin: Spectroscopic ap-
proach. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2006;41(2):393–9.
37. Lamprecht A, Ubrich N, Pérez MH, Lehr C-M, Hoffman M,
Maincent P. Influences of process parameters on nanoparticle
preparation performed by a double emulsion pressure homogeni-
zation technique. Int J Pharm. 2000;196(2):177–82.
38. Guhagarkar SA, Malshe VC, Devarajan PV. Nanoparticles of
polyethylene sebacate: a new biodegradable polymer. AAPS
PharmSciTech. 2009;10(3):935–42.
39. Lamprecht A, Ubrich N, Yamamoto H, Schafer U, Takeuchi H,
Lehr CM, et al. Design of rolipram-loaded nanoparticles: compar-
ison of two preparation methods. J Control Release. 2001;
71(3):297–306.
40. Braakhuis BJ, Ruiz van Haperen VW, Boven E, Veerman G,
Peters GJ. Schedule-dependent antitumor effect of gemcitabine
in in vivo model system. Semin Oncol. 1995;22(4 Suppl 11):42–6.
41. dos Santos T, Varela J, Lynch I, Salvati A, Dawson KA. Effects of
transport inhibitors on the cellular uptake of carboxylated polystyrene
nanoparticles in different cell lines. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24438.
42. Alexander RL, Greene BT, Torti SV, Kucera GL. A novel phospho-
lipid gemcitabine conjugate is able to bypass three drug-resistance
mechanisms. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2005;56(1):15–21.
BSA-PLGA-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Water-Soluble Drugs
2409