RESEARCH ARTICLE
Development of quercetin nanoformulation and in vivo
evaluation using streptozotocin induced diabetic rat model
Deepak Chitkara & Sanjay K. Nikalaje &
Anupama Mittal & Mahesh Chand & Neeraj Kumar
Published online: 18 February 2012
# Controlled Release Society 2012
Abstract Quercetin-loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) nanoparticles (Qu-NP) were prepared by emul-
sion–diffusion–evaporation method and characterized as
179.9±11.2 nm in size with 0.128 as polydispersity index,
more than 86% drug entrapment efficiency, and zeta poten-
tial was −6.06±1.51 mV. D-Trehalose (5% w/v) was found
to be a suitable cryoprotectant for lyophilization of Qu-NP,
and antioxidant assays indicated that Qu-NP were able to
retain the antioxidant property similar to that of free drug at
equivalent concentration after formulation development. In
vitro release study of Qu-NP showed a controlled release
pattern of quercetin. An enhanced oral bioavailability
(523% relative increase) was observed in pharmacokinetic
study with a 6-day sustained release from Qu-NP as com-
pared to quercetin suspension, which indicated the reduced
dosing frequency. Efficacy in diabetic rats suggested that
same dose of Qu-NP on every fifth day was sufficient to
bring effect similar to daily dose of oral quercetin suspen-
sion, and the same effect was also observed for catalase and
superoxide dismutase levels in pancreas and kidneys. Thus,
the system offers an efficacious oral therapy with reduced
dose and dosing frequency for treatment of diabetes and is
hence patient compliant.
Keywords Quercetin . Nanoparticles . Oral delivery.
Controlled release . Bioavailability. Diabetes
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common endocrine
metabolic disorders wherein imbalance of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and natural antioxidant defense mechanisms
occurs, leading to oxidative stress. Excessive oxidative
stress has been implicated in the pathology of diabetes and
further leads to complications associated with the disease.
Parallelly, impaired generation of naturally occurring anti-
oxidants also result in increased oxidative injury. In this
situation, external supply of antioxidants is essential to
counter balance the dangerous effects of oxidative stress. It
is evident that flavanoid antioxidants like quercetin have
potential role in ROS scavenging in the pathogenesis of
diabetes, which can also delay the oxidative injury and cell
death [1–3].
Quercetin (3,3′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxy flavone) is the most
potent polyphenolic flavanoid antioxidant having a broad
range of biological, pharmacological, and medical benefits
[4]. Several studies have provided evidence of the role of
quercetin in prophylaxis and therapy of various disorders
related to oxidative stress [5]. These studies show superox-
ide anion scavenging activity, antilipid peroxidation, anti-
superoxide formation and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picryhydrazyl
(DPPH) scavenging activity of quercetin [6]. Apart from
this, it also exerts antiproliferative effect on different malig-
nant cells by several mechanisms, such as inhibition of the
cell cycle at control points G0/G1, G1/S, and G2/M, inter-
action with estrogen II binding sites [7], inhibiting glycoly-
sis and activity of several enzymes like protein kinase C,
mitogen-activated protein kinase, cell division cycle kinase,
and tyrosine kinase. It is reported that quercetin induces
UDP-glucoronyl transferase activity [8] and is an inhibitor
of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) [9], multidrug resistance protein
[10] and Cyp3A [11].
D. Chitkara: S. K. Nikalaje: A. Mittal: M. Chand:
N. Kumar (*)
Department of Pharmaceutics, National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research (NIPER),
Sector 67, SAS Nagar,
Mohali 160 062, India
e-mail: neeraj@niper.ac.in
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
DOI 10.1007/s13346-012-0063-5

However, pharmaceutically, quercetin is a challenging
molecule to be delivered due to its poor solubility, low
hydrophilicity (log P of 1.81), gastrointestinal instability,
extensive first pass metabolism, and minimal absorption in
gastrointestinal tract [2]. Quercetin belongs to BCS class II.
It has been reported that its oral bioavailability is <17% in
rats and <2% in humans [12, 13], thereby limiting its clin-
ical application using conventional dosage forms. Thus, an
improved oral formulation of quercetin is required with
better bioavailability and higher efficacy.
Approaches based on nanoformulations for the delivery
of potential therapeutic molecules have been reported to
improve the efficacy of such molecules, which otherwise
suffer from certain limitations [14–18]. Different delivery
systems for quercetin have been reported such as nanopar-
ticles [6], solid lipid nanoparticles [12], liposomes [19], and
microemulsion [20] for various applications, such as in
neurodegenerative disease, aging, etc. Wu et al. [6] have
reported Eudragit E and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) nanopar-
ticles to increase the dissolution of quercetin, which showed
enhanced release of quercetin up to 74-fold and exhibited
more effective DPPH scavenging, antisuperoxide formation,
superoxide anion scavenging, and antilipid peroxidation
activity as compared to pure drug. Solid lipid nanoparticles
(SLN) were prepared to increase oral bioavailability of
quercetin, which showed increased relative oral bioavail-
ability by 5.71-fold and drug release for 48 h in vivo [12].
Ghosh et al. [21] evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of nano-
encapsulated quercetin in arsenic oxide-induced ROS-
mediated oxidative damage in hepatocytes and brain cells
by oral administration prior to arsenite treatment and
observed an improvement in antioxidant levels in brain
and liver. Recently, quercetin has also been encapsulated
in poly(D,L-lactide) (PLA) nanoparticles for improve-
ment of its poor aqueous solubility and stability, and it
was observed that antioxidant activity of nanoparticles
and free drug was similar; however, no further work is
reported in the literature [22]. Considering the different
drug delivery approaches reported in the literature, it
becomes evident that quercetin nanoparticulate formula-
tion may offer an appropriate solution to exploit the
therapeutic potential of the drug for the treatment of
diabetes.
In the present study, quercetin-loaded PLGA nano-
particulate formulation is developed and evaluated using
oral route for efficacy in diabetes and enhanced oral
bioavailability at reduced dose and reduced dosing fre-
quency. For this purpose, pharmacokinetic study was
carried out in male Sprague–Dawley rats to assess the
oral bioavailability and sustained release of quercetin
from Qu-NPs. Antidiabetic efficacy of the formulation
was evaluated in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat model
by measuring the levels of blood glucose and natural
antioxidants, catalase, and superoxide dismutase (SOD) in
pancreas and kidneys.
Materials and methods
Materials
Quercetin dihydrate was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis,
MO, USA) and used as received. PLGA (75/25) was syn-
thesized in-house by ring opening polymerization from
DL-lactide and glycolide using stannous-2-ethylhexanoate as
catalyst (0.2% w/w). Both DL-lactide and glycolide were taken
in a round bottom flask (RBF) and distilled in the presence of
toluene and dried under vacuum. Stannous-2-ethylhexanoate
(in toluene) was added to the reaction flask, and toluene
was evaporated under vacuum. The temperature was raised
to 150°C. After 10 min, vacuum was removed, and reaction
was allowed to continue under nitrogen atmosphere for 8 h.
Crude polymer so obtained was then purified twice by dis-
solving in dichloromethane and precipitating in isopropyl
alcohol. The purified polymer was then dried under vacuum
for 48 h and characterized for molecular weight and LA/GA
ratio by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and 1H NMR.
GPC was performed using chloroform (HPLC grade) filtered
through 0.22-μm filter and sonicated for 60 min. Chroma-
tography was carried out at 35°C temperature using a
Shimazdu LC-10AD HPLC pump and Shimazdu RID-6A
refractive index detector coupled with a styragel HR4 column
in an isocratic mode with the stated mobile phase at a flow rate
of 1 ml/min. The sample injection volume was 100 μl, and
data were analyzed using “GPC for Class-Vp” software. The
molecular weight distribution obtained was Mw of 94 kDa, Mn
of 75 kDa, and polydispersity index of 1.25. 1H NMR was
used to determine the lactic acid/glycolic acid ratio. A small
amount of the synthesized PLGA was dissolved in deuterated
chloroform (CDCl3) and analyzed using a Bruker (Avane
DPX 300) NMR. Tetramethylsilane signal was taken as the
zero of chemical shift. The spectrum was recorded in the
chemical shift (δ) values ranging from 0 to 11 ppm and lactic
acid/glycolic acid ratio was calculated to be 73:27 (in mole
percent). PLGA was used from the same batch for complete
study. All other chemicals were of analytical grade and used as
purchased.
Preparation of quercetin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles
(Qu-NP)
Nanoparticles were prepared by emulsion–diffusion–
evaporation method with slight modification [23]. PLGA
(50 mg) and quercetin were dissolved in ethyl acetate (3 ml;
organic phase) and kept on stirring for 1 h. It was then
emulsified with PVA solution (1% w/v; 5 ml; aqueous phase)
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
113

while stirring at 1,000 rpm to form o/w primary emulsion. The
primary emulsion was homogenized (Polytron PT4000; Poly-
tron Kinematica, Lucerne, Switzerland) at 20,000 rpm for
5 min and then added drop wise to 30 ml of double distilled
water while stirring at 1,000 rpm. Ethyl acetate was then
removed by evaporation, colloidal suspension of PLGA
nanoparticles was centrifuged at 17,000×g for 5 min
and washed twice with double distilled water to remove
unentrapped drug and adsorbed PVA. Nanoparticles at
three initial drug loadings, i.e., 10%, 15%, and 20% w/w were
prepared and characterized for particle size, PDI, zeta poten-
tial, drug loading, entrapment efficiency, and surface
morphology.
Characterization of Qu-NP
Particle size distribution and zeta potential
Particle size distribution and zeta potential of nanoparticles
were determined using Zeta sizer (Malvern ZS, UK) by
dynamic light scattering technique. For particle size meas-
urements, nanoparticles were dispersed in double distilled
water, and measurements were carried out in triplicate tak-
ing an average of five measurements. Zeta potential, which
is an indicative parameter for the stability of nanoparticles,
was estimated on the basis of electrophoretic mobility of
nanoparticles under an electric field. The measurements
were carried out in triplicate, each being an average of 30
measurements.
Morphology
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of nanoparticles
was taken to examine the shape and surface morphology. For
this purpose, nanoparticles were mounted on an aluminum
stub with double-sided adhesive carbon tape and dried in air
followed by coating with gold using sputter coater. Coated
samples were then observed under SEM (Hitachi S-3400,
Tokyo, Japan) to study the morphology of the particles.
Quercetin loading and encapsulation efficiency
For determination of drug loading and encapsulation effi-
ciency, drug-loaded nanoparticles were harvested from the
suspension by centrifugation at 17,000×g for 5 min and
pellet obtained was dried under vacuum for 48 h. Weighed
amount of dried pellet was dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN;
5 ml) by sonication for 5 min. Samples were then filtered
and analyzed by reversed phase HPLC method using Zor-
bax Eclipse XDB-C18 (5 μm, 250×4.6 mm) column. Mo-
bile phase consisted of ACN/sodium acetate buffer (pH 3.8)
(37:63) in isocratic mode at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Detec-
tion was carried out at 373 nm using photodiode array
detector. Drug loading and encapsulation efficiency were
calculated using the following equations.
Encapsulation efficiency ð%Þ ¼
Mass of drug in nanoparticles
Mass of drug used in formulation  100
ð1Þ
Drug loading ð%w=wÞ ¼
Mass of drug in nanoparticles
Mass of drug loaded nanoparticles  100
ð2Þ
Freeze drying of Qu-NP
Qu-NPs were freeze dried using a VirTis freeze dryer (Wiz-
ard 2.0). For this purpose, nanoparticles were suspended in
double distilled water (2 ml) in glass vials, and a solution of
lyoprotective agent was added to keep their concentration at
5% w/v in final suspension. Different lyoprotective agents
such as glucose, sucrose, D-trehalose, lactose, and sorbitol
were screened. Lyophilization cycle encompassed three
steps: (1) Samples were frozen to −45°C step wise for 7 h
in seven-step process (thermal treatment); (2) after freezing
step, samples were dried from −45°C to 20°C in 33.5 h in a
ten-step process (primary drying); and (3) secondary drying
was performed at 25°C for 5 h. The freeze-dried samples
were resuspended in double distilled water and evaluated for
particle size and size distribution, redispersibility and appear-
ance of formed cake.
In vitro evaluation of Qu-NP
Quercetin release study
Quercetin has a low solubility in phosphate buffer; however,
there is a requirement of sink condition in the bulk phase
during in vitro release studies. To maintain the sink con-
ditions, the release study was carried out in phosphate buffer
(100 mM; pH 7.4) containing 5% w/v Tween-80 using
dialysis bag method. Nanoparticles (1 mg equivalent of
quercetin) were placed in a dialysis bag (10,000 MW cut-
off), and the bag was suspended in a vial containing 15 ml of
release media. It was placed in a reciprocal shaking water
bath and kept at 37°C. At regular time intervals, 1 ml of
release medium was withdrawn followed by replacement of
the same amount of fresh medium. The amount of drug
released was then analyzed using validated HPLC method.
Antioxidant assays
Two different antioxidant assays were performed, viz.
DPPH scavenging activity assay (to show the free radical
114
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123

scavenging activity) and antisuperoxide formation assay (for
xanthine oxidase inhibition activity) for quercetin and
Qu-NP.
DPPH scavenging activity assay DPPH is a stable free
radical and can be used to determine the free radical scav-
enging activity of the drug or nanoparticles [6]. Pure quer-
cetin and Qu-NP were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide, and
DPPH was dissolved in ethanol (200 mM solution). Then,
both the solutions were mixed in equimolar proportion
and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Sample
without quercetin was used as a control sample and
gave maximum absorbance. The absorbance of the reaction
solution was measured by a microplate spectrophotom-
eter (Biotek PowerWave XS2) at 517 nm. The percent
scavenging effect of free radical by quercetin was cal-
culated using Eq. 3.
% Scavenging effect ¼ Ab517 control  Ab517 sample
Ab517 control
 100
ð3Þ
Antisuperoxide formation assay Quercetin has xanthine oxi-
dase inhibition activity and prevents the formation of
free radicals, which are generated during the interaction
of xanthine with xanthine oxidase. It can be directly
measured by the formation of uric acid and analyzed
at 295 nm in UV spetrophotometer. Superoxide anion and
hydrogen peroxide are also generated as side products as
given in pictorial diagram.
Not formed
Quercetin
Xanthine oxidase
Xanthine
Uric acid + superoxide anion + H2O2
In this method, the test sample was mixed with xanthine,
xanthine oxidase, and deionized water, and suspension was
vortexed for 2 min. Sample without quercetin was taken as
control sample. The superoxide anion formation was deter-
mined spectrophotometrically by measuring uric acid pro-
duction at 295 nm [6]. The percentage of inhibition was
calculated using Eq. 4.
% Inhibition ¼ Ab295 control  Ab295 sample
Ab295 control
 100
ð4Þ
In vivo evaluation of the formulation
All studies (pharmacokinetic and efficacy studies) were
conducted in male Sprague–Dawley rats (∼250 g). Animals
were housed in plastic cages in a 12-h dark–light cycle with
controlled temperature (25°C) and humidity (70%). Food
and water were provided ad libitum throughout the study.
All protocols were approved by Institutional Animal Ethics
Committee, NIPER, SAS Nagar, India, and experiments
were performed in accordance with the guidelines of
CPCSEA, India.
Pharmacokinetic studies
Pharmacokinetic study was carried out to assess the oral
bioavailability (using Eq. 5) and quercetin levels in the
central compartment.
% Relative bioavailability ¼ AUCðQu  NPÞ=AUCðQu  SUSÞ  100
ð5Þ
Animals were kept on fasting for overnight before start of
the experiment. Animals were randomly divided into two
groups. Group 1 received 150 mg/kg quercetin suspension
in 2.5% w/v aqueous solution of sodium carboxymethyl cel-
lulose, and group 2 received equivalent dose of Qu-NP (with
initial drug loading of 15% w/w) suspended in water via oral
gavage. Blood samples (0.5 ml) were collected at regular time
intervals into heparinized microcentrifuge tubes, and plasma
was separated immediately by centrifugation at 10,000×g for
10 min at 15°C. After centrifugation, plasma samples were
collected as supernatant and stored at −60°C until analyzed.
For determination of quercetin in the plasma samples, a
HPLC-UV bioanalytical method was developed and val-
idated. In brief, 200 μl of plasma was taken in microcentri-
fuge tube containing 25 μl of hisperetin solution (10 μg/ml) as
internal standard. To this, methanol (1 ml) and hydrochloric
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
115

acid (25%, 100 μl) were added and vortexed for 2 min to
precipitate out proteins. Samples were centrifuged at
10,000×g for 10 min, and supernatant was evaporated using
Centrivac dryer (Heto, Germany). The residue left was recon-
stituted in 100 μl of mobile phase (ammonium acetate buffer
(25 mM; pH 3.5) and ACN (63:37)) and analyzed using a
Shimadzu HPLC system coupled with a PDA detector at a
flow rate of 1 ml/min and injection volume of 75 μl. Analyt-
ical wavelength (λmax) for detection of quercetin and hisper-
etin were 373 and 288 nm, respectively.
Efficacy studies in diabetic rat model
In vivo efficacy of quercetin-loaded nanoparticles was
assessed in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat model. For this
purpose, diabetic rat model was developed by intraperitonial
administration of streptozotocin at a dose of 55 mg/kg in
Sprague–Dawley rats. Diabetes was induced in 2 days, which
was confirmed by analyzing blood glucose level using glu-
cose determination kit (Accurex, Thane, India). In this study,
diabetic and normal animals were divided into five groups
(n06), and each group was given the treatment as shown in
Table 1. All animals in each group were assessed twice weekly
for 15 days by measuring blood glucose levels. After 15 days,
animals were killed, and target organs (kidneys and pancreas)
were excised to determine the levels of natural antioxidants,
i.e., catalase and SOD using reported procedures [24, 25].
Statistics
Statistical evaluation was performed using one-way ANOVA
followed by Holm–Sidak test using SigmaPlot 11.0 for Win-
dows. The significance level was set at P<0.05.
Results and discussion
Characterization of Qu-NP
In vivo performance of any nanoformulation depends on the
particle size and size distribution, drug loading, and
redispersibility of the cake during reconstitution at the time
of delivery to the patient. Particle size is a very important
parameter since it influences the drug release, in vivo
uptake, and absorption via payer’s patches and thus overall
bioavailability of the formulation [26]. In this study, Qu-NP
showed a particle size of 179.9 nm at 10% initial drug loading,
which increased to 257.3 and 278.5 nm for 15% and 20%
w/w drug loading batches, respectively (Table 2). Increase in
particle size on increasing the drug loading is a commonly
observed phenomenon during the preparation of nanopar-
ticles. It was also observed that increasing the initial drug
loading from 10% to 20% also resulted in a wider size distri-
bution of nanoparticles; PDI increased from 0.128 to 0.311 but
was still within the acceptable limit (<0.4). The increase in
particle size and PDI may be attributed to the increase in the
drug loading since at higher drug loading more amount of
drug would be present in the nanoparticles [27].
Drug loading and entrapment efficiency of quercetin in
Qu-NP are shown in Table 2. It is observed that entrapment
efficiency was higher than 86% in case of 10% and 15% (w/w)
initial drug loadings, while it was 72% at 20% (w/w) drug
loading. The most likely reason for higher encapsulation
efficiency of quercetin in PLGA nanoparticles could be the
lipophilic character of quercetin, leading to higher drug parti-
tioning into polymeric matrix of nanoparticles and lesser into
the external aqueous phase. On further increase in drug load-
ing to 20%, a decrease in entrapment efficiency was seen,
which could be due to the increased drug concentration gra-
dient in polymer matrix, and this leads to higher drug leaching
to the external medium during the preparation step. Further-
more, the drug holding capacity of the polymer could have
also reached to the maximum and thus led to a decrease in
encapsulation efficiency.
Zeta potential value depicts the surface charge of the
particles in suspension form, hence directly influences the
particle stability in aqueous dispersion. Qu-NPs were found
to have zeta potential of ≈−6 mV, which was not signifi-
cantly affected by changing the drug loading. The higher the
value of the zeta potential, the more will be the electrostatic
repulsion, and hence, the greater will be the stability of
nanoparticulate suspension. For stability of the formulation,
Table 1 Study design for effi-
cacy experiments
Qu-SUS quercetin suspension,
Qu-NP quercetin nanoparticles
Sample number
Group
Treatment
Treatment schedule
1
Normoglycemic (control)
No treatment
–
2
Normoglycemic
Quercetin suspension
150 mg/kg daily for 15 days
3
Diabetic (control)
No treatment
–
4
Diabetic Qu-SUS
Quercetin suspension
150 mg/kg daily for 15 days
5
Diabetic Qu-NP
Quercetin loaded NP
150 mg/kg every 5th day for
15 days
116
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123

different surfactants have been reported in the literature,
among these PVA is the preferred surfactant due to its better
safety profile; however, it creates a less negative zeta poten-
tial in nanosuspension, and thus, it is less resistant to aggre-
gation. Furthermore, to enhance the stability of such
formulations with a smaller zeta potential value, freeze
drying appears to a suitable method, which not only
improves the stability but also facilitates handling of the
colloidal systems in solid form [28]. The prepared formula-
tion was further assessed for surface morphology using
SEM, which showed spherical particles with smooth sur-
face, indicating the absence of any unentrapped or adsorbed
drug (Fig. 1).
For freeze drying of Qu-NP, different sugars such as
sucrose, lactose, glucose, sorbitol, and D-trehalose were
screened as lyoprotectants at 5% w/v concentration, and
their effect on cake formation, particle size, and redispersi-
bility of Qu-NP was studied (Fig. 2, Table 3). In the case
when no lyoprotectant was used, an increase in particle size
of Qu-NP was observed. Collapsed cake was formed when
sorbitol was used. The use of D-trehalose, glucose, sucrose,
and lactose as cryoprotectant showed a good cake forma-
tion, and the ratio of final particle size (Sf) to initial particle
size (Si) was found to be close to 1; however, redispersibility
was found to be better when D-trehalose was used.
In vitro evaluation of the formulation
Drug release study
For efficacy of a drug formulation, it is important that drug
should be released at desired rate to maintain the therapeutic
concentration in the blood stream as well as at the site of
action. In PLGA-based nanoformulation, which is a matrix
type system, drug is released through diffusion and matrix
degradation processes, and thus, it becomes important to
know the drug release behavior under in vitro conditions,
which may be affected by several factors [29] such as nature
of drug molecule and polymeric matrix, size and shape of the
particles, type of degradation (bulk vs. surface erosion), etc.
Quercetin is a lipophilic drug with a very poor aqueous
solubility (≤10 μg/ml); thus, in order to maintain the sink
conditions during in vitro release studies, Tween-80 (5%
w/v) was added to the release media in which the solubility of
quercetin was found to be 1.3 mg/ml. The release of quercetin
from the Qu-NP (Fig. 3) showed that 20–40% drug was
released in 1 day followed by a very slow release for 42 days
of the study period. To confirm the complete release, mass
balance of drug remaining in the nanoparticles was carried
out; thus, these particles were dissolved in acetonitrile and
analyzed. The residual quercetin in the nanoparticles was
found to be 29%, 26%, and 21%, which confirm that most
of the drug is stable during the release experiments. When
release was compared for different drug loading samples, a
slightly faster release of quercetin from the Qu-NP with 20%
w/w initial drug loading was observed as compared to 10%
and 15% w/w. This could be attributed to the difference in the
proportion of polymer available to entrap quercetin in the
nanoparticles, thereby decreasing the rate of diffusion of quer-
cetin from different Qu-NP. Since 20% w/w drug loading
Qu-NP have lower ratio of polymer to quercetin than 15% and
10% w/w, thus release of quercetin occurred at a faster rate, but
this difference in the release was statistically insignificant.
Antioxidant assays
In vitro antioxidant assays are frequently employed to deter-
mine the free radical scavenging activity of an antioxidant.
Table 2 Characterization of Qu-NP prepared at different initial drug loadings
Batch
number
Initial drug
loading (% w/w)
Entrapment
efficiency ( %)
Practical drug
loadinga (%w/w)
Particle
size (nm)
Polydispersity
Index (PDI)
Zeta potential
(mV)
A
10
86.50
13.44
179.9±11.2
0.128±0.01
−6.06±1.51
B
15
88.17
19.02
257.3±27.3
0.226±0.19
−6.67±1.44
C
20
72. 07
24.10
278.5±39.3
0.311±0.08
−6.57±0.39
a In the present case practical drug loading is achieved higher than initial drug loading due to the higher loss of polymer content at processing stage
in comparison to drug content
Fig. 1 SEM photograph of Qu-NP. Magnification 15.0k
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
117

The objective of this study was to ascertain the functional
stability of quercetin after nanoparticles preparation. Querce-
tin produces its antioxidant activity by two mechanisms, either
by scavenging the free radicals or by inhibiting enzymes
responsible for the production of free radicals, e.g., xanthine
oxidase, etc. Thus, two different antioxidant assays were con-
ducted, viz. DPPH scavenging activity and xanthine oxidase
inhibition activity.
DPPH is a stable free radical and has been used to deter-
mine the free radical scavenging activity of a compound.
Quercetin has free radical scavenging activity due to its ability
to donate the hydrogen ion, which stabilizes the free radicals
and prevents the oxidation of the lipid, protein, and DNA and
reduces the injuries caused by oxidative stress. SC50 value is
the concentration of the antioxidant required to scavenge 50%
of free radicals in the presence of antioxidant, and it was found
to be 10.03 μg/ml for quercetin control. Qu-NPs were ana-
lyzed at an equivalent amount of quercetin, and no statistically
significant difference was observed between the quercetin
(control) and Qu-NP (Fig. 4), indicating that the antioxidant
activity of quercetin was preserved after encapsulation in the
nanoparticles.
To access the antisuperoxide formation activity, IC50
value was determined, which is the concentration of the
antioxidant required to inhibit 50% of enzyme activity in
the presence of antioxidant. IC50 value for quercetin was
found to be 10.63 μg/ml. Quercetin in Qu-NP was also able
to retain the antisuperoxide formation activity as that of free
quercetin control as shown in Fig. 4.
In vivo evaluation of the formulation
Pharmacokinetic studies
Qu-NPs were designed to enhance the oral bioavailability
and sustain the in vivo plasma levels of quercetin. Studies
were conducted in male Sprague–Dawley rats wherein plas-
ma levels of the drug after oral administration of quercetin
suspension and Qu-NP at an equivalent dose of 150 mg/kg
were determined at regular time intervals. The plasma con-
centration–time profile of quercetin suspension and Qu-NP
is shown in Fig. 5. The relevant pharmacokinetic parameters
were calculated by trapezoidal method using Kinetica 5.0
software and have been listed in Table 4.
During the drug absorption through GIT membrane,
quercetin makes conjugate with sulfates and glucuronides;
thus, it reaches to central compartment in the form of free
drug as well as drug conjugates [3, 4]. Thus, it is important
to develop an analysis method through which the entire
quercetin content can be analyzed. In the present study,
modified acid hydrolysis method was used to cleave all
the ester bonds of quercetin metabolites such that these
metabolites also get converted back to the drug itself, which
Fig. 2 Appearance of Qu-NP
cake after lyophilization. a
Without lyoprotectant, b with
glucose, c with D-trehelose, d
with sucrose, e with sorbitol, f
with lactose
Table 3 Optimization of cryoprotectant used in freeze drying
Cryoprotectant
(5% w/v)
Appearance of
lyophilized product
Ratio (Sf/Si)
Reconstitution
score
No cryoprotectant
Intact cake
2.57
−
Glucose
Shrinkage of cake
1.08
+
D-trehalose
Intact cake
1.00
+++
Sucrose
Intact cake
1.03
++
Sorbitol
Collapsed cake
–
−
Lactose
Intact cake
1.05
+
Sf particle size after freeze drying, Si particle size before freeze drying
118
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123

was then analyzed by the bioanalytical HPLC method [12].
The lower limit of quantification of quercetin by the vali-
dated bioanalytical HPLC method was found to be 50 ng/
ml. After administration of Qu-NPs, it was observed that the
quercetin plasma levels at 2.4 μg/ml were reached within
15 min; thereafter, there was a steep decline to 700 ng/ml in
2 h. In 6 h, quercetin levels further increased to 900 ng/ml
followed by a gradual decrease over a period of 6 days. In
contrast to this, oral administration of quercetin suspension
showed plasma concentration of 110 ng/ml of quercetin in
15 min, which reached at a Cmax of 435 ng/ml in 4 h
followed by a decline to undetectable limits after 24 h.
The early appearance of maximal quercetin plasma concen-
tration after oral administration of Qu-NP could be attribut-
ed to the specialized uptake mechanism of nanoparticles,
which occurs directly via gut-associated lymphatic tissue
(GALT) and further into the peripheral blood compartment
leading to faster absorption [30]. However, in case of quer-
cetin suspension, the drug is absorbed by passive diffusion
through the intestine. Enhanced rate of absorption of the
drug through GALT is reported in the literature, wherein
quercetin with fat diet was absorbed at a faster rate due to
incorporation into chylomicrons with consecutive export
into the peripheral blood via lymph [31, 32]. Furthermore,
a second peak of quercetin was observed at 6 h after admin-
istration of Qu-NP, which could be due to the bio-adhesion
of the PLGA nanoparticles in the gut mucosa, leading to
prolonged absorption of quercetin [33, 34]. Similar phenom-
enon in the pharmacokinetic study is also reported in the
literature for drug-loaded SLNs [30, 35, 36]. The relative
Fig. 3 In vitro release profiles
of Qu-NP at different initial
drug loadings (n03). Formula-
tions A, B, and C refer to the
Qu-NP with practical drug
loading of 13.44%, 19.02%,
and 24.10%, respectively
Fig. 4 The antioxidant activities
of quercetin (control) and Qu-NP
at different drug loadings (n03).
No statistically significant
difference was observed between
any of the formulations vs. pure
quercetin indicating the func-
tional stability of quercetin
after encapsulation in PLGA
nanoparticles
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
119

bioavailability of quercetin was determined by comparing
the area under curve (AUC) values of Qu-NP with that of
quercetin suspension and was found to be 523%. This
marked difference between Qu-NP and quercetin suspen-
sion could be attributed to the specialized uptake of nano-
particles through payer’s patches via M-Cells into the
lymphatic system and then directly into the systemic circula-
tion and thus bypassing the first pass metabolism. In addition
to this, nanoparticles prevent the enzymatic degradation of
quercetin in the GIT. Furthermore, PLGA matrix provided a
barrier for quercetin release in vivo thereby, enhancing its
mean residence time in plasma. These results clearly indicate
that dose as well as dosing frequency of quercetin could be
reduced by employing the developed nanoparticulate formu-
lation for the treatment of diabetic disorder.
Efficacy studies in diabetic rat model
Streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rat model was
developed to study the efficacy of Qu-NP. STZ is an
antibiotic produced by Streptomyces achromogenes and
is the most commonly used chemical agent to induce
experimental diabetes in rats [1, 37, 38]. It is taken up
by pancreatic β-cells via glucose transporter GLUT2
and causes alkylation of the DNA by the nitrosourea
moiety ultimately leading to death of β-cells. For the
induction of diabetes, STZ was injected intraperitoneally
at a single dose of 55 mg/kg. Diabetes was induced in
2 days as confirmed by the elevated blood glucose
levels; thereafter, animals were randomly divided into differ-
ent groups and were treated with quercetin suspension and
Qu-NP as shown in Table 1. Normal rats (normoglycemic
group) in which no diabetes was induced served as the nega-
tive control wherein glucose levels were ≈100 mg/dl, while in
diabetic (positive control) group, it reached to 530 mg/dl.
Significantly lower glucose levels were seen in diabetic
groups treated with quercetin suspension as well as Qu-NP
as against diabetic control group (Fig. 6). In addition to this,
diabetic groups treated with Qu-NP showed better effect than
that of quercetin suspension at days 7, 10, and 15 (P<0.05)
although Qu-NP were administered every fifth day in com-
parison to daily dosing of quercetin suspension. It indicates
that there is a sustained supply of quercetin from Qu-NP
formulation at a single dose in 5 days, whereas the same effect
Fig. 5 Comparative in vivo
plasma concentration-time pro-
file of quercetin suspension
(oral) and Qu-NP (oral) indi-
cating an increased AUC/bio-
availability and sustained
plasma levels of quercetin from
Qu-NP (n04)
Table 4 Pharmacokinetic parameters for different quercetin formulations
Formulation studied
Dose (mg/kg)
Cmax (μg/ml)
tmax (min)
AUC0–∞(μg/ml min)
Quercetin suspension (oral)
150
0.435
240
594
Qu-NP (oral)a
150
2.426; 0.925
15; 360
3107
a Two peaks were observed for Qu-NP
120
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123

was observed after daily administration of quercetin suspen-
sion at the same dose. In the present study, normal levels of
blood glucose were not reached in the treatment groups due to
permanent damage of substantial number of β-cells in the
pancreas by streptozotocin as indicated by the high blood
glucose levels [37]. The antihyperglycemic effect of quercetin
might be due to its antioxidant property, which scavenges the
free radicals produced by STZ and thus helps the sur-
viving β-cells to proliferate and secrete more insulin. In
addition to this, quercetin also enhances the insulin sensitivity,
leading to increased utilization of glucose by the extrahepatic
tissues and thereby decreasing the blood glucose levels. This
observation is supported by the literature reports where these
types of flavanoids enhance insulin release up to 70% by
acting on islet function [39, 40].
Level of natural antioxidants, SOD, and catalase was also
determined in pancreas and kidneys, since their status in
these two organs indicate the extent of oxidative damage,
which is usually altered in oxidative stress conditions. In
this study, it was observed that in diabetic control group, the
levels of SOD and catalase were significantly reduced than
the normoglycemic group (Fig. 7) due to the excess gener-
ation of ROS. Upon treatment with quercetin in the form of
drug suspension as well as Qu-NP, the activity of SOD and
catalase was significantly increased since quercetin miti-
gates the action of ROS on SOD and catalase.
Fig. 6 Blood glucose level profile of normoglycemic and streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats after treatment with Qu-NP and Qu-SUS (n06).
Diabetic control showed a value significantly higher than normoglycemic
and normoglycemic-QuNP groups at all points (P<0.05). At days 7, 10,
and 15, *P<0.05 for diabetic control and Qu-SUS. Qu-NP (150 mg/kg
every fifth day) showed similar effect to that of Qu-SUS (150 mg/kg
daily) indicating requirement of less dose and reduced dosing frequency
Fig. 7 Effect of treatment with Qu-NP and Qu-SUS upon the
activities of SOD and catalase in pancreas and kidneys in normal
and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. One unit of SOD is
defined as the concentration of enzyme that gives half maximal
inhibition of nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) dye reduction. One unit
of catalase is defined as the amount of enzyme that liberates half
the peroxide oxygen from a hydrogen peroxide solution under
assay conditions.
@P<0.05 vs. diabetic control, normoglycemic
and normoglycemic Qu-SUS;
#P<0.05 vs. diabetic control and
normoglycemic and normoglycemic Qu-SUS; *P<0.05 vs. diabetic con-
trol, $P<0.05 vs. diabetic control. Qu-NP and Qu-SUS show a statisti-
cally significant difference in SOD and catalase activities as compared to
diabetic control group. While Qu-NP (150 mg/kg every fifth day) and
Qu-SUS (150 mg/kg daily) do not show any statistically significant
difference in SOD and catalase activities thereby indicating reduced dose
and dosing frequency of quercetin after nanoencapsulation
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
121

Conclusion
In the present study, quercetin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles
(Qu-NP) were successfully prepared and tested at reduced
dose and lesser frequency for pharmacokinetics as well as
efficacy in rat model. In pharmacokinetic study, it was
observed that Qu-NP showed an increase of 523% in rela-
tive oral bioavailability of quercetin to that of quercetin
suspension, indicating the potential to reduce dose using
Qu-NP. Additionally, the plasma levels of quercetin were
also sustained for 6 days in vivo, thus promising a reduced
dosing frequency. In the efficacy studies, decrease in blood
glucose level was observed in diabetic rats treated with
quercetin suspension (150 mg/kg given daily) and Qu-NP
(150 mg/kg given every fifth day) as compared to diabetic
control group. Catalase and SOD levels were also found to
be significantly increased in the diabetic rats treated with
Qu-NP (150 mg/kg every fifth day), and these levels were
approximately equal to the quercetin suspension (150 mg/kg
daily) treated groups. These results clearly demonstrate that
Qu-NP offers an efficacious oral therapy with reduced dose
and dosing frequency for treatment of diabetes and is hence
patient compliant.
Acknowledgments
DC and AM are thankful for their research asso-
ciate ship award to Department of Biotechnology (DBT) and Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) respectively to carry out
this research. NK is thankful to NIPER for financial support through
grant C-11 (Nanotechnology and drug delivery).
References
1. Mahesh T, Menon VP. Quercetin allievates oxidative stress in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Phytother Res. 2004;18:123–7.
2. Date AA, Nagarsenker MS, Patere S, Dhawan V, Gude RP, Hassan
PA, et al. Lecithin-based novel cationic nanocarriers (Leciplex) II:
improving therapeutic efficacy of quercetin on oral administration.
Mol Pharm. 2011;8:716–26.
3. Zhang L, Zuo Z, Lin G. Intestinal and hepatic glucuronidation of
flavonoids. Mol Pharm. 2007;4:833–45.
4. Chen X, Yin OQ, Zuo Z, Chow MS. Pharmacokinetics and mod-
eling of quercetin and metabolites. Pharm Res. 2005;22:892–901.
5. Boots AW, Haenen GR, Bast A. Health effects of quercetin: from
antioxidant to nutraceutical. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008;585:325–37.
6. Wu TH, Yen FL, Lin LT, Tsai TR, Lin CC, Cham TM. Preparation,
physicochemical characterization, and antioxidant effects of quer-
cetin nanoparticles. Int J Pharm. 2008;346:160–8.
7. Kim YJ, Bae YC, Suh KT, Jung JS. Quercetin, a flavonoid, inhibits
proliferation and increases osteogenic differentiation in human
adipose stromal cells. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006;72:1268–78.
8. Galijatovic A, Walle UK, Walle T. Induction of UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase by the flavonoids chrysin and quercetin
in Caco-2 cells. Pharm Res. 2000;17:21–6.
9. Ott M, Huls M, Cornelius MG, Fricker G. St. John’s Wort con-
stituents modulate P-glycoprotein transport activity at the blood–
brain barrier. Pharm Res. 2010;27:811–22.
10. van Zanden JJ, van der Woude H, Vaessen J, Usta M, Wortelboer
HM, Cnubben NH, et al. The effect of quercetin phase II metab-
olism on its MRP1 and MRP2 inhibiting potential. Biochem Phar-
macol. 2007;74:345–51.
11. Umathe SN, Dixit PV, Kumar V, Bansod KU, Wanjari MM.
Quercetin pretreatment increases the bioavailability of pioglita-
zone in rats: involvement of CYP3A inhibition. Biochem Pharma-
col. 2008;75:1670–6.
12. Li H, Zhao X, Ma Y, Zhai G, Li L, Lou H. Enhancement of
gastrointestinal absorption of quercetin by solid lipid nanopar-
ticles. J Control Release. 2009;133:238–44.
13. Gao L, Liu G, Wang X, Liu F, Xu Y, Ma J. Preparation of a
chemically stable quercetin formulation using nanosuspension
technology. Int J Pharm. 2011;404:231–7.
14. Hariharan S, Bhardwaj V, Bala I, Sitterberg J, Bakowsky U, Ravi
Kumar MN. Design of estradiol loaded PLGA nanoparticulate
formulations: a potential oral delivery system for hormone therapy.
Pharm Res. 2006;23:184–95.
15. Sonaje K, Italia JL, Sharma G, Bhardwaj V, Tikoo K, Kumar
MNVR. Development of biodegradable nanoparticles for oral deliv-
ery of ellagic acid and evaluation of their antioxidant efficacy
against cyclosporine A-induced nephrotoxicity in rats. Pharm
Res. 2007;24:899–908.
16. Yen F-L, Wu T-H, Lin L-T, Cham T-M, Lin C-C. Naringenin-loaded
nanoparticles improve the physicochemical properties and the hep-
atoprotective effects of naringenin in orally-administered rats with
CCl4-induced acute liver failure. Pharm Res. 2009;26:893–902.
17. Devadasu VR, Wadsworth RM, Kumar MNVR. Protective effects
of nanoparticulate coenzyme Q10 and curcumin on inflammatory
markers and lipid metabolism in streptozotocin-induced diabetic
rats: a possible remedy to diabetic complications. Drug Deliv and
Transl Res. 2011;1:448–55.
18. Blum JS, Weller CE, Booth CJ, Babar IA, Liang X, Slack FJ, et al.
Prevention of K-Ras- and Pten-mediated intravaginal tumors by
treatment with camptothecin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles. Drug
Deliv and Transl Res. 2011;1:383–94.
19. Priprem A, Watanatorn J, Sutthiparinyanont S, Phachonpai W,
Muchimapura S. Anxiety and cognitive effects of quercetin lip-
osomes in rats. Nanomedicine. 2008;4:70–8.
20. Vicentini FT, Simi TR, Del Ciampo JO, Wolga NO, Pitol DL,
Iyomasa MM, et al. Quercetin in w/o microemulsion: in vitro and
in vivo skin penetration and efficacy against UVB-induced skin
damages evaluated in vivo. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2008;69:948–57.
21. Ghosh A, Mandal AK, Sarkar S, Panda S, Das N. Nanoencapsu-
lation of quercetin enhances its dietary efficacy in combating
arsenic-induced oxidative damage in liver and brain of rats. Life
Sci. 2009;84:75–80.
22. Kumari A, Yadav SK, Pakade YB, Singh B, Yadav SC. Develop-
ment of biodegradable nanoparticles for delivery of quercetin.
Colloids Surf B: Biointerfaces. 2010;80:184–92.
23. Mittal G, Carswell H, Brett R, Currie S, Ravi Kumar MNV.
Development and evaluation of polymer nanoparticles for oral
delivery of estradiol to rat brain in a model of Alzheimer’s pathol-
ogy. J Control Release. 2011;150:220–8.
24. Luck H. Catalase spectrophotometric method. In: Bergmeyer H-U,
editor. Methods in enzymatic analysis. New York: Academic;
1963. p. 885–93.
25. Kono Y. Generation of superoxide radical during autooxidation of
hydroxylamine and an assay of superoxide dismutase. Arch Bio-
chem Biophys. 1978;186:189–95.
26. Mittal G, Sahana DK, Bhardwaj V, Ravi Kumar MNV. Estradiol
loaded PLGA nanoparticles for oral administration: Effect of poly-
mer molecular weight and copolymer composition on release behav-
ior in vitro and in vivo. J Control Release. 2007;119:77–85.
27. Govender T, Stolnik S, Garnett MC, Illum L, Davis SS. PLGA
nanoparticles prepared by nanoprecipitation: drug loading and
122
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123

release studies of a water soluble drug. J Control Release.
1999;57:171–85.
28. Abdelwahed W, Degobert G, Stainmesse S, Fessi H. Freeze-drying
of nanoparticles: formulation, process and storage considerations.
Adv Drug Del Rev. 2006;58:1688–713.
29. Fredenberg S, Wahlgren M, Reslow M, Axelsson A. The
mechanisms of drug release in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-
based drug delivery systems—a review. Int J Pharm. 2011;415:34–
52
30. Luo CF, Yuan M, Chen MS, Liu SM, Zhu L, Huang BY, et al.
Pharmacokinetics, tissue distribution and relative bioavailability of
puerarin solid lipid nanoparticles following oral administration. Int
J Pharm. 2011;410:2011.
31. Azuma K, Ippoushi K, Ito H, Higashio H, Terao J. Combination of
lipids and emulsifiers enhances the absorption of orally adminis-
tered quercetin in rats. J Agric Food Chem. 2002;50:1706–12.
32. Lesser S, Cermak R, Wolffram S. Bioavailability of quercetin in
pigs is influenced by the dietary fat content. J Nutr. 2004;134:1508–
11.
33. He W, Horn SW, Hussain MD. Improved bioavailability of orally
administered mifepristone from PLGA nanoparticles. Int J Pharm.
2007;334:173–8.
34. Jawahar N, Nagasamy Venkatesh D, Sureshkumar R, Senthil V,
Ganesh GNK, Vinoth P, et al. Development and charecterization of
PLGA-nanoparticles containing carvedilol. J Pharm Sci & Res.
2009;1:123–8.
35. Löbenberg R, Araujo L, Kreuter J. Bodydistribution of azidothy-
midinebound to nanoparticles after oral administration. Eur J
Pharm Biopharm. 1997;44:127–32.
36. Yang S, Zhu J, Lu Y, Liang B, Yang C. Body distribution of
camptothecin solid lipid nanoparticles after oral administration.
Pharm Res. 1999;16:751–7.
37. Coskun O, Kanter M, Korkmaz A, Oter S. Quercetin, a flavanoid
antioxidant, prevents and protects streptozotocin-induced oxida-
tive stress and β-cell damage in rat pancreas. Pharmacol Res.
2005;51:117–23.
38. Vessal M, Hemmati M, Vasei M. Antidiabetic effects of quercetin
in streptozocin-induced diabetic rats. Comp Biochem Physiol C
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2003;135:357–64.
39. Hii CS, Howell SL. Effects of epicatechin on rat islets of Langer-
hans. Diabetes. 1985;33:291–6.
40. Hii CST, Howell SL. Effects of flavanoids on insulin secretion and
45Ca2+ handling in rat islets of langerhans. J Endocrinol. 1985;
107:1–8.
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2012) 2:112–123
123