VOLUME 9999, 2018
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
1
Design and Characterization of a Multi-Layered Polymeric
Drug Delivery Vehicle
Kei Xian Tan,1 Saﬁna Ujan,1 Michael K. Danquah2* and Sie Yon Lau1
1. Department of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Sarawak 98009, Malaysia
2. Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Tennessee, Chattanooga, TN 37403, United States
Aptamer-mediated targeted delivery is a promising advanced therapeutic delivery strategy with the potential to provide site-directed cyto-toxicity
to malignant cells. However, effective translation of preclinical aptamer-navigated targeted delivery data into clinical success has been challenged by
several biophysical and biochemical factors including rapid renal clearance, endonuclease-induced degradation, and cell membrane electrostatic
repulsion. Aptamer-conjugated biopolymer systems represent new and smart drug carriers capable of delivering adequate amounts of drug
molecules sufﬁcient to elicit effective in vivo therapies at target sites in a controlled and sustained drug release pattern. In this work, a novel
co-polymeric multi-layer BSA-loaded thrombin aptamer-conjugated PLGA-PEI (DPAP) formulation was synthesized using a w/o/w double emulsion
and characterized layer-by-layer in vivo. DLS analysis of the DPAP particles showed a positively charged DPAP particulate system with a D[4,3]
average hydrodynamic size of 0.866 mm and a zeta potential of þ9.85 mV. The zeta potential and D[4,3] average hydrodynamic size of DPAP
layered compartments demonstrated pH-dependence but are not temperature dependent. The ionic strength of the binding medium affected the
degradation and release rates of DPAP micro-particles. A strong binding strength and shielding effect of DPAP towards encapsulated BSA molecules
was observed under increasing ionic strength. Thermogravimetric analysis showed that the DPAP formulation decomposes at 300 8C,
demonstrating the thermal stability of the polymer composite for effective storage in temperate environments. The data from this study is vital to
engineer the interactions between DPAP polymeric system and cellular structures in order to enhance targeting events. While the DPAP construct
demonstrates a great potential for targeted delivery, more in vivo delivery work is essential to prove its pre-clinical targeting capability.
Keywords: aptamer, targeted drug delivery, biopolymer, microparticles, pharmaceutical
INTRODUCTION
T
he search for smart pharmaceutical delivery systems has
become signiﬁcant as a result of inefﬁciency and safe
concerns associated with conventional
drug delivery
strategies. Current therapeutic delivery systems such as immuno-
therapy, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy are often challenged
with weak target speciﬁcity, low therapeutic indices, as well as
poor pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of active drug
ingredients, resulting in systemic cytotoxic level and severe
unwanted side effects. It is therefore critical to develop smart
delivery systems capable of addressing existing limitations with
conventional
delivery
approaches.
Targeted
pharmaceutical
delivery platforms are a promising strategy to advance in vivo
cell targeting for enhanced therapeutic delivery. For instance,
millirobotic systems have been introduced for local targeted
delivery of drugs and imaging contrast agents for in vivo
manipulation capabilities and visual imaging.[1] Nanoparticles
drug delivery systems are also well-reviewed across blood-brain
barriers in order to treat brain diseases.[2] An ideal targeted
delivery system employs targeting ligands and allows sufﬁcient
dosage of active drug molecules to be delivered speciﬁcally to
target site in a controlled and sustained release pattern over an
appropriate period of time.[3,4]
In this work, an aptamer-mediated multi-layer co-polymeric
system called DPAP was synthesized and characterized as an
enhanced drug delivery carrier. The bottom-up engineering
method is utilized in this study to generate a smart drug delivery
system.[5] The layer-by-layer architecture of the DPAP delivery
system is composited as drug-encapsulated poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)(PLGA)-aptamer- poly(ethylene imine)(PEI). Bovine serum
albumin (BSA) acts as a model drug (D), hydrophobic PLGA
polymeric core acts as the innermost layer entrapping the BSA
drug molecules (P), thrombin-speciﬁc DNA aptamer coupled onto
the surface of the PLGA layer acts as the targeting ligand (A) and
hydrophilic PEI acts as the outermost polymeric layer surrounding
the BSA-PLGA-Aptamer core (P) and intercalated with the
aptamer.
Aptamer-mediated
delivery
has
some
limitations.
These
include rapid bio-distribution and renal excretion, endonucle-
ase-mediated attack, electrostatic repulsion between negatively
charged aptamer and target cell membrane, and undesirable
immobilization and complexation of aptamer molecules.[6] The
current limitations have incited research interests into the use of
biodegradable polymers as delivery vehicles. Polymeric for-
mulations are more favourable for pharmaceutical purposes
than other drug delivery vehicles due to their high efﬁcacy and
safety in term of biodegradability, biocompatibility, and low
immunogenicity.
In
addition,
they
possess
tuneable
and
modiﬁable biophysical features such as ease of surface coupling
and modiﬁcations, allowing a wide variety of ligands to be
conjugated. PLGA is a well-known polymeric delivery vector for
pharmaceutical applications due to its FDA-approved biosafety,
high payload capacity, pH-dependent degradation in endosomes,
and ease of size modiﬁcations to carry molecules with various
* Author to whom correspondence may be addressed.
E-mail address: michael-danquah@utc.edu
Can. J. Chem. Eng. 9999:1–10, 2018
© 2018 Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering
DOI 10.1002/cjce.23389
Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com).
1243
VOLUME 97, 2019
 97:1243–1252, 2019

2
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
VOLUME 9999, 2018
shapes and sizes. On the other hand, PEI is a polycationic
transfection agent capable of encapsulating and condensing
anionic aptamer molecules to enhance electrostatic interactions
between the aptamer and the desired cell membrane, leading to
enhanced targeting efﬁciency, cellular uptake, and transfection
efﬁciency of active ingredients. The application of polymeric
formulations in targeted delivery is a promising strategy to
maximize the performance of aptamers as well as to enhance the
delivery of sufﬁcient drug pay-load to targeted cells.[7] There are
several
reported works
proving the efﬁcacy
of
enhanced
pharmaceutical delivery utilizing aptamer-linked polymeric
nano/micro-particles with higher therapeutic indices in various
medical
treatments
for
leukemia[8,9]
as
well
as
breast,[7]
prostate,[10] and colon cancer.[11]
This research article discusses the DPAP concept design and
synthesis approach and in vitro characterization of each layer in
the design architecture. The chemical and physical properties,
binding strength, and stability of the individual compartments
were examined in terms of zeta potential and D[4,3] average
hydrodynamic size under varying physicochemical conditions.
The efﬁcacy of DPAP as a potential targeted delivery vehicle was
evaluated based on in vitro measurements of encapsulation
efﬁciency and loading capacity. The decomposition and thermal
stability of DPAP formulation was also investigated via TGA
analysis. The thrust of the work relates to probing the biophysical
core of DPAP formulation as a basis of understanding and
engineering polymer degradation and drug release characteristics
during targeted delivery.
METHODOLOGY
Materials
PLGA with 50:50 ratio of lactide:glycolide and molecular
weight of 30–60 kDa, branched PEI with a 25 kDa molecular
weight, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) with a molecular weight of
31–50 kDa, acetone with a molecular weight of 58.08 g/mol
(Laboratory Reagent,  99.5 %), n-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS)
with a 217.13 g/mol molecular weight ( 98 % HPLC), 1-ethyl-
3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide (EDC) with a molecu-
lar
weight
of
191.70 g/mol
(premium
quality
level
and
commercial grade), and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) tablet
were
purchased
from
Sigma
Aldrich
(Malaysia).
15-mer
thrombin speciﬁc-DNA aptamer, with oligonucleotide sequence
50-GGT TGG TGT GGT TGG-30 (5.0 mmole scale, PCR Grade, 225
OD) was purchased from 1st BASE (Malaysia). BSA with
molecular weight 66 kDa ( 98 % by agarose electrophoresis)
was purchased from Santa Cruz, USA.
Methods
Layer-by-layer analysis of DP, DPA, and DPAP formulations
Layer-by-layer surface analysis of the different compartments of
DPAP particulates was performed via dynamic light scattering
(DLS) measurements using Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS measure-
ments to investigate the zeta potential and hydrodynamic
size distribution under varying conditions of pH, ionic strength,
and temperature. In brief, 0.1 % w/v DP, DPA, and DPAP
suspensions were prepared using PBS buffer, and 0.1 M HCl and
0.1 M NaOH were used to vary the pH of the suspensions
from 3–11. To study the effect of temperature on the hydrody-
namic size, 0.2 % w/v DP, DPA, and DPAP suspensions
were synthesized and exposed to water baths set at different
temperatures: 25, 30, 37, and 42 8C. The effect of temperature
is critical to understand the extent of surface molecular kinetics
on the charge and size of the particulates.
Encapsulation of BSA and aptamer
The quantity of BSA and thrombin-speciﬁc DNA aptamer
encapsulated within the DPAP micro-particulate matrix was
determined from the difference between the initial amount of
BSA and aptamer included in the formulation and the amount of
free BSA and aptamer measured in the PVA emulsiﬁer mixture
after DP and DPAP composites synthesis. After DP synthesis, the
suspension was spanned down using a refrigerated centrifuge
(Model: Universal 320R, Hettich) at 4 8C and 4000 rpm for
20 min prior to 260 nm UV absorbance measurements using a
UV-visible spectrophotometer (Lambda 25 UV/Vis Double Beam,
Perkin Elmer) to determine the concentration of free BSA in the
supernatant. DPAP suspension was also centrifuged under
identical conditions as the DP before 280 nm UV absorbance
measurements to measure the concentration of free aptamer
molecules
in
the
supernatant.
The
following
equations
were used to calculate encapsulation efﬁciency and loading
capacity:[12]
Encapsulation efficiency ð%Þ ¼
Amount of encapsulated BSA or DNA aptamer
Amount of ⁢initial BSA or DNA aptamer added  100
ð1Þ
Loading capacity ¼
Amount of encapsulated BSA
Total amount of PLGA applied
ð2Þ
Effects of ionic strength on the structural and binding stability of
DPAP formulation
The effect of ionic strength on the hydrodynamic size, zeta
potential, and binding stability of DPAP particles was investigated
using a monovalent cation (Naþ). This is intended to study
potential changes in the characteristics features of DPAP under
high salinity serum conditions. Different concentrations of Naþ
were prepared (20 mM, 50 mM, 100 mM, and 1 M), and 0.5 mL of
each was added to 0.36 % w/v DPAP suspensions and incubated
for 30 min. Subsequently, the DPAP/Naþ suspensions were
centrifuged at 4000 rpm and 4 8C for 10 min and aliquots of the
supernatants were collected for UV absorbance measurements at
260 and 280 nm. The remaining DPAP/Naþ solutions were used
for hydrodynamic size and zeta potential measurements.
Thermogravimetric analysis of DP and DPAP particulate systems
The thermal stability of lyophilized DP and DPAP micro-
particles was investigated using thermogravimetric analysis
with differential scanning calorimetry to simultaneously deter-
mine the change in mass and enthalpy of the formulations
respectively at a constant heating rate in an inert environ-
ment.[13,14] This study is important to understand the thermal
stability of the bio-polymer complexation and monitor potential
molecular rearrangements in the form of exotherm within the
particulate matrices of DP and DPAP formulations. The TGA
system was purged with nitrogen at 20 8C per min before use.
9 mg each of DP and DPAP particles were placed on aluminium
pans and analyzed from 30–800 8C at a constant heating rate of
10 8C/min and 25.0 mL/min nitrogen gas as the inert medium.
STARe evaluation software was used to analyze the TGA results
of DP and DPAP particles.
VOLUME 97, 2019
1244
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

VOLUME 9999, 2018
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
1
Drug release proﬁle of DPAP formulation
The in vitro release characteristics of BSA molecules from the
DPAP particulate system were analyzed over a period of 13 d in a
PBS buffer condition at 37 8C. 2 % w/v DPAP suspensions with
different pH (5–8) were prepared prior to DPAP incubation at
150 rpm. At designated time intervals (every 4.5 h intervals for
day 1 and every 24 h intervals from day 2–13), the DPAP mixture
was sampled, centrifuged at 4000 rpm and 4 8C for 10 min and the
supernatant was analyzed for drug concentration at 280 nm. All
absorbance readings were recorded in triplicate and averaged.
Fresh PBS buffer was added to replenish the extracted supernatant
with respective pH for continuous incubation.
Statistical analysis
Each block of experiment was carried out in triplicate at least, and
the average values were reported as the ﬁnal analytical results.
Experimental data are reported as average  standard deviation
and/or standard error.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Synthesis and Formulation of DPAP Particles
DPAP formulation was synthesized using an integrated water-in-
oil-in-water
(w/o/w)
double
emulsion
and
ultrasonication
process, as was described previously.[15] As illustrated in Figure 1,
the structural architecture of DPAP formulation comprises an
inner core synthesized from hydrophobic PLGA polymeric
particles encapsulating BSA drug molecules. Thrombin-speciﬁc
DNA aptamer molecules were conjugated onto the surface of the
PLGA polymeric layer via EDC/NHS chemical activation. Hydro-
philic and positively charged PEI polymeric particles were
intercalated onto the negatively charged aptamers as the outer-
most layer shielding the inner aptamer-coupled BSA-loaded PLGA
particles. DPAP design strategy aims to produce a multifunctional
delivery system where both the PLGA and PEI polymeric particles
act as delivery carriers to protect the encapsulated drug molecules
and the aptameric targeting ligand. The design is intended to
protect the structural and functional integrity of both the active
drug molecules and the targeting ligand for enhanced desired cell
recognition, cellular uptake, transfection efﬁciency, and the
delivery of sufﬁcient drug concentration with effective therapeutic
dosage to the target cell. The cationic nature of the PEI outer layer
provides positive surface charge characteristics to the DPAP
particulate system thus enhancing electrostatic interactions with
the target cell membrane to improve endocytosis. The multi-
layered characteristics of DPAP allows a greater shielding effect
to the drug and aptameric ligand payload from undesirable
physiological conditions and interactions such as endonuclease
attack, premature release, biochemical complexation, and bio-
distribution. As a result, current challenges associated with
targeted delivery systems such as poor targeting capability, drug
leakage, low integrity of drug molecules, and insufﬁcient drug
dosage can be greatly minimized by the DPAP design approach
whilst offering a controlled drug release mechanism.
Layer-by-Layer Zeta Potential and Size Analysis of DPAP
Formulation
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis was used to determine the
D[4,3] average hydrodynamic diameter, size distribution, zeta
potential, and colloidal stability of the layered compartments of
DPAP particulate system, as shown in Figures 2a and b. The DLS
data is important to probe the unique biophysical characteristics of
each layered compartment and how this changes during synthesis
and contributes to the overall characteristics features of DPAP
micro-particles. From Figure 2 it can be seen that the D[4,3]
average
hydrodynamic
diameter
of
naked
BSA
started
at
217.0 nm, and after encapsulation into PLGA, the hydrodynamic
Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of DPAP particulate architecture.
Figure 2. (a) The average D[4,3] hydrodynamic size of the layered
compartments of DPAP particulate system; and (b) polydispersity index per
layered compartment during DPAP synthesis. The different layers are DP,
DP-EDC/NHS, DPA, and DPAP.
1245
VOLUME 97, 2019
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
VOLUME 9999, 2018
diameter of the complex (DP) was to 1220 nm. This supports
successful complexation of BSA molecules onto PLGA. In w/o/w
double emulsion with the ultrasonication method, the dissolved
water-soluble BSA in aqueous phase is mixed and dispersed in the
organic phase containing PLGA solution in acetone (polymeric
matrix). In addition, it is followed by the emulsiﬁcation and
solvent evaporation process under appropriate stress mixing
parameters to produce solidiﬁed DP complex via phase separa-
tion.[16] Hence, electronegative BSA molecules were conﬁned
successfully within a positively charged PLGA polymeric shell
core via absorption and intermolecular electrostatic interactions
amongst them, corresponding with the increase in hydrodynamic
size of DP formulation. The size of these emulsiﬁed particle
droplets can be altered by different stirring rate and temperature.
The average hydrodynamic size of DP increased to 1318 nm after
EDC/NHS coupling and surface modiﬁcation reaction, with the
slight increase resulting from the addition of carboxylic functional
groups onto the DP particle surface. The pH of the DP-EDC/NHS
system was adjusted to around 2.7 to enable aptamer conjugation.
With a lower pH, the surface charge of DP-EDC/NHS is activated to
enhance electrostatic interactions and linkage of aptamer mole-
cules onto the DP-EDC/NHS layer. The average diameter of the DP-
EDC/NHS system signiﬁcantly reduced to 1040 nm after DNA
aptamer coupling onto the surface to produce DPA particles. The
size reduction is potentially due to electrostatic attractions
between the cationic DP-EDC/NHS particulate system and
negatively charged DNA aptamer molecules, causing partial
condensation of the particulate formulation through inter-particle
interactions. Figure 2 demonstrates that PEI polymeric particles
were successfully intercalated onto the outer aptameric membrane
of DPA particulate system to produce the ﬁnal DPAP formulation.
This is supported by the D[4,3] average hydrodynamic diameter
from 1040 nm for DPA to 866.4 nm for DPAP. It is evident that
strong electrostatic interactions exist between positively charged
PEI particles and the electronegative aptamer surface layer of DPA,
leading to the generation of intercalated DPAP polyplex with high
stability. Also, the aptamer molecules with highly electronegative
charges generate a surface network conﬁguration with PEI that
lowers the net positive polarity of the DPAP system in order to
stabilize the outermost PEI layer and form DPAP with improved
homogeneity.
Zeta potential is an important biophysical property that can be
used to investigate the stability of colloidal particulate systems.
The DLS data in Figure 3 shows electronegative naked BSA
molecules with an average zeta potential of 8.98 mV. After BSA
complexation with PLGA, the zeta potential of the resulting DP
particulate system was þ0.018 mV, indicating that positively
charged PLGA particles reduced the electronegativity of BSA
molecules at a constant pH of 7. After EDC/NHS coupling, the zeta
potential of the DP- EDC/NHS formulation reduced to 10.1 mV
as a result of the introduction of carboxylic functional groups onto
the terminal end of PLGA polymeric particles.[17] With high
electronegativity, pH adjustment through protonation was essen-
tial to reinstate positively charged surface characteristics for
aptameric binding. This process neutralized excess negatively
charged carboxylic surface moieties. DP zeta potential increased to
þ3.84 mV after protonation, allowing effective aptamer conjuga-
tion onto its surface. The zeta potential of DPA formulation was
electronegative with a surface charge of 7.48 mV, demonstrating
effective conjugation of aptamer molecules on the DP surface to
produce electronegative DPA micro-particles. Figure 3 shows that
the ﬁnal DPAP particulate system demonstrated a positive zeta
potential of þ9.85 mV due to the intercalation between the
outermost positively charged hydrophilic PEI layer and the
negatively charged aptamer anchors to form stable polyplex.
With the aptamer molecules intercalated with the PEI polymeric
layer, the electrostatic repulsions between the anionic aptamer
and the cell membrane of target cells can be greatly minimized to
enhance target-cell interactions, endocytosis, cellular uptake, and
intracellular therapeutic effects. The multifunctional character-
istics of DPAP is partly attributed to its co-polymeric nature and
the layered conjugation assembly of the drug and ligand
molecules. This offers unique physicochemical characteristics
that improve encapsulation efﬁciency, loading capacity, targeting
speciﬁcity, and controlled release kinetics of active molecules. The
proton sponge mechanism of PEI helps to enhance the endosomal
release of encapsulated active molecules into cytosol and towards
the nucleus for therapeutic effects via active transport.[18]
Encapsulation Efficiency and Loading Capacity of DPAP
Particulate system
A UV-visible spectrophotometric analysis was performed to
determine the encapsulation efﬁciency and loading capacity of
DPAP formulation. DPAP demonstrated high BSA drug encap-
sulation
efﬁciency
and
loading
capacity
of
92.68 2 %
0.185 0.003 mg
BSA
per
mg
PLGA,
respectively.
DPAP
particulate system also showed effective aptamer conjugation
with 75 % encapsulation efﬁciency. These results show that the
DPAP particulate system is capable of harbouring a signiﬁcant
payload of drug and aptamer molecules, shielding them from
harsh physiological conditions such as endonuclease attacks and
rapid renal clearance. As a result, a sufﬁcient dosage of aptamer
and drug molecules can be retained for cell-targeting and
therapeutic activities. The enhanced encapsulation of DPAP is
due to the formation of PEI-aptamer polyplex resulting from
strong electrostatic interactions. The encapsulation efﬁciency
of DPAP formulation is amongst the highest report in the
literature.[7,8,19] In comparison to POE-PEI microspheres devel-
oped by Nyugen et al.[19] using double emulsion (w/o/w)
method, the DPAP formulation obtained a higher encapsulation
efﬁciency. This demonstrates that w/o/w double emulsion along
with ultra-sonication technology promotes better encapsulation
as a result of enhanced surface interaction and particulate
composition of the co-polymeric system and active molecules.
Figure 3. Zeta potential measurements of the layered compartments of
DPAP formulation. The different layers are DP, DP-EDC/NHS, DPA, and
DPAP.
VOLUME 97, 2019
1246
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

VOLUME 9999, 2018
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
1
Also, DPAP demonstrated an improved encapsulation efﬁciency
compared to work reported by Aravind et al.[8] who designed
and generated paclitaxel-loaded AS1411 aptamer-conjugated
PLGA-lecithin-PEG nanoparticulate system via nanoprecipita-
tion method and obtained 60.76 3.4 % encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency.
The
study
by
Alibolandi
et
al.[7]
obtained
an encapsulation efﬁciency of 91.25 4.27 %. They produced
EpCAM aptamer-PEG-PLGA nanospheres using a pH gradient
and
EDC/NHS
coupling
reaction
to
deliver
encapsulated
doxorubicin to targeted breast cancer cells.
Effect of pH on the Zeta Potential of DP, DPA, and DPAP
Formulations
The effect of pH on the surface polarity and size distribution of a
colloidal formulation can be attributed to the degree of charge
stabilization in response to protonation and deprotonation. DLS
analysis data in Figure 4 shows that the electronegativity of DP
increased gradually with an increasing pH from pH 3–11, except
at pH 7 and pH 11 with zeta potentials þ0.0181 mV and
þ0.0391 mV, respectively. DLS analysis showed the isoelectric
point (IEP) of DP formulation as pH 3.63. IEP addresses the pH
condition where excess electrical charge density and intermolec-
ular electrostatic repulsions of the molecules are lowered to zero,
leading to stronger inter-chain aggregation amongst molecules.
DP
formulation
showed
increasing
electronegativity
with
increasing pH gradient due to charge deprotonation phenomenon
under high OH- conditions. Excess OH- ions bound and interact
with DP particle surface to form an electronegative layer. At
neutral pH 7, DP showed a positive zeta potential close to zero.
This is due to the lack of extra OH- or Hþ ions to cause
deprotonation or protonation. Under this condition, surface
charge activation for solubilisation and hydrolysis is minimal.
Zeta potential measurements for DPA showed increasing
electronegativity from þ5.67 to 11 mV over a pH range of
3–11. The IEP of DPA was determined as 4.75. As the medium
increases in alkalinity, DPA particles lose Hþ ions due to
deprotonation, resulting in increasing electronegativity of the
DPA system. DPA possessed a positive surface charge at pH 3 as a
result of protonation of the electronegative aptameric exterior.
DPA particles showed electronegative surface charges at pH 7 due
to the anionic characteristics of the conjugated aptamer molecules
onto the DP outer layer. The alternating degree of electronegativity
with the increasing pH could be due to surface redistribution of
ionic species to maintain biophysical stability of the complex. As
seen in Figure 4, the electronegativity of DP particles shows a
ﬂuctuating trend between pH 9–11. This is attributed to DP
formulation that entered an initial degradation stage triggered by
increasing alkalinity. As a result, the anionic and cationic
compartments of degraded DP react with various counter ions
available in the medium thus, ﬂuctuating its electronegativity
before the completion of DP degradation.
Figure 4 shows the average zeta potential of DPAP reduced
steadily from þ4.72 to 5.94 mV over the pH range 3–11. This can
be explained by the deprotonation of PEI cationic groups on the
DPAP surface layer thus increasing the electronegativity of the
DPAP particles. The converse phenomenon explains why DPAP
microspheres were positively charged at pH 3 and 4. The low pH
conditions enabled protonation of DPAP system, creating a
shielding effect with increased positive charge. DPAP was positive
at pH 7 with a zeta potential of þ0.82 mV due to the absence of
excess OH- ions to trigger deprotonation. The positive surface
charge of DPAP at pH 7 is important to improve target cell
interactions and intracellular uptake of drug ingredients into
desired cells. In addition, the IEP of DPAP was determined as 5.59,
indicating that the structural conformations and functionality of
DPAP can be modiﬁed via surface molecular engineering to
provide a controlled drug release pattern using a pH-sensitive
degradation mechanism under physiological conditions. DPAP
system demonstrates desirable features as a potential multifunc-
tional transport vehicle for enhanced pharmaceutical delivery.
Effect of pH on the Hydrodynamic Size of DP, DPA, and DPAP
Formulation
Figure 5 shows increasing average D[4,3] hydrodynamic size of DP
from 959.5–1220 nm over the pH range 3–7 and decreased sharply
to 671.6 nm at pH 8, remaining in this region from pH 9–11. The
result demonstrates that DP particles maintain the highest average
hydrodynamic size at pH close to neutrality. The hydrodynamic
size is low under high acidity and alkalinity when excess OH- and
Hþ ions interfere with the structural stability or the electrostatic
Figure 4. Measured zeta potential of DP, DPA, and DPAP formulation over
the range of pH 3–11.
Figure 5. D[4,3] average hydrodynamic size of DP, DPA, and DPAP
formulation over the range of pH 3–11.
1247
VOLUME 97, 2019
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
VOLUME 9999, 2018
binding equilibrium of BSA within the PLGA matrix. Figure 4
shows DP formulation is positively charged under acidic pH
conditions of 3 and 4. Under these conditions, the degree of inter-
particulate electrostatic repulsion between DP particles is maximal
due to high electropositivity from protonation (DPþ < // > Hþ),
resulting in reduced surface charge compatibility for agglomera-
tion. On the other hand, extreme alkali conditions produce excess
OH- ions that endow DP particles with a net electronegative charge
through deprotonation, facilitating inter-particulate repulsion
between negatively charged DP particles (DP- < // > OH-). DP
particles possess reduced average hydrodynamic size under high
alkaline conditions, and this is as a result of hindered agglomera-
tion by electrostatic repulsion. At an extremely high pH of 11, DP
displayed a positive charge with reduced hydrodynamic size,
potentially due to structural degradation under extreme alkaline
conditions.
The average hydrodynamic size of DPA particles was consistent
within the narrow range 976.7–1197 nm at pH 3 and 6–10 as there
was no charge accumulation to alter the conformation and
bonding structures within DPA formulation.[20] The signiﬁcant
charge stability of the outer aptameric layer of DPA enables
conformational rigidity over a wide pH range. From the zeta
analysis, the IEP of DPA was determined as pH 4.75. Accordingly,
the average hydrodynamic size of DPA peaked at pH 4 and 5 (1 670
and 755.6 nm, respectively) due to the close proximity to the IEP,
resulting in reduced intermolecular repulsion and increased
hydrophobicity and aggregation of particles. The highest hydro-
dynamic size of DPA obtained was 2 204 nm at pH 11, and this can
be attributed to the presence of high surface charge density under
extreme alkaline environment, causing strong repulsive forces
and hydrophobic attractions and affecting the DPA structures and
resulting in coalescence of new conformants from DPA structural
deformation.
Figure 5 shows that under extreme acidic and alkaline
conditions, DPAP formulation displayed low average hydrody-
namic sizes of 519.2, 324.2, and 559.1 nm at pH 3, 10, and
11, respectively. This is due to the presence of excess OH- and
Hþ ions that alter the surface charge of DPAP formulation,
leading to hydrolytic cleavage of DPAP particulate bonding
structures including hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interaction,
covalent
bonding,
and
Van
der
Waals
interactions.
The
average size of DPAP micro-particles was constant within the
range 685.6–780.8 nm over pH 5–8, representing a signiﬁcant
biophysical stability of DPAP particulate system at pH close to
neutral, and this is certainly advantageous to in vivo clinical
applications. At pH 6, the average size of DPAP reduced
signiﬁcantly, indicating molecular induction of polymeric hydro-
lysis between pH 5.5–6. This is a desired characteristic of DPAP
demonstrating response to degradation under acidic endosomal
environment (pH 5.5) to facilitate the release of encapsulated
drug molecules from DPAP into targeted cells.
Effect of Temperature on the Biophysical Characteristics of DP,
DPA, and DPAP Formulations
Temperature is a critical parameter in examining the stability
of polymeric drug formulations. It is also important to
understand potential changes in drug release kinetics under
varying temperature conditions in response to variations in
body temperatures from patient to patient. DLS analysis was
used to study the effect of varying temperatures on the zeta
potential and stability of DP, DPA, and DPAP formulations at a
constant pH of 7. Figure 6 shows DP remained electronegative
at temperatures of 25, 30, 37, and 42 8C with zeta potentials of
6.15,
6.93,
9.48,
and
8.61 mV,
respectively.
This
indicates
that
the
surface
electrical
charge
density
and
ionization of DP micro-particles at pH 7 are not inﬂuenced
by temperature. Minor differences in the zeta potential values
could be attributed to induce stretching of surface molecules
and/or molecular re-arrangements in response to increasing
thermal ﬂux. DPA micro-particles possess similar zeta potential
values at temperatures of 25, 30, 37, and 42 8C with surface
charges of 7.01, 7.76, 9.27, and 9.21, respectively. This
indicates that the electronegativity of the aptameric outer
surface offered sufﬁcient stability over the temperature range
investigated. DPAP particulate system maintained a positive
charge
over
the
range
of
temperature
investigated
with
þ4.95 mV for 25 8C, þ4.34 mV for 30 8C, þ6.88 mV for
37 8C, and þ5.11 mV for 42 8C. The data generally indicates
that DP, DPA, and DPAP are stable under temperature
conditions within the range of 25–42 8C. The electropositive
nature of DPAP was preserved under elevated temperature
conditions, demonstrating its capacity to maintain surface
charge characteristics for effective transfection efﬁciency and
cellular uptake for patients with slightly higher or lower body
temperatures.
Figure 7 shows the average D[4,3] hydrodynamic size of DP
formulation remained largely the same at 25, 30, and 42 8C with
1129, 1033, and 1048 nm, respectively. However, the size of DP
increased signiﬁcantly to 1406 nm at 37 8C. High temperature
variations can signiﬁcantly affect the strength of inter-particulate
interactions amongst polymeric formulations. It can be inferred
that intact polymer chain dynamics and the structural bonding of
DP micro-particles were not signiﬁcantly perturbed under ambient
temperature conditions between 25–30 8C. When the temperature
was elevated to 37 8C, the average hydrodynamic size of DP
particles increased. This can be explained by the increased intra-
molecular mobility of DP particles under high thermal ﬂux
conditions, boosting their kinetic energy and causing polymer
chain stretching in all directions and expansion per unit volume of
space. This results in weak intra-particulate attractive forces,
forming DP particles with larger diameters.[21] It may be deduced
that induced diffusion of drug molecules from DP can be triggered
under elevated temperature conditions due to a hydrolytic phase
Figure 6. Zeta potential stability of DP, DPA, and DPAP particulate systems
under varying temperature conditions of 25, 30, 37, and 42 8C.
VOLUME 97, 2019
1248
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

VOLUME 9999, 2018
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
1
transition at 37 8C. Notably, a further temperature increase to
42 8C did not result in average size increase due to complete
thermo-molecular hydrolysis of PLGA structures beyond the
phase transition temperature. De and Robinson[22] reported that
temperature and particulate size affect the stability of PLGA nano/
micro-formulations. Their work corresponds with our research
ﬁndings as they established that PLGA micro-particles are more
resistant to temperature than PLGA nanoparticles in terms of
degree of aggregation. DP micro-particles did not aggregate under
high temperatures.
Figure 7 shows the inﬂuence of DPA average hydrodynamic size
on temperature. DPA particles subjected to increasing temperature
conditions showed a narrow ﬂuctuating trend in average
hydrodynamic size. The narrow ﬂuctuating trend is potentially
a reﬂection of the randomness in the particle surface molecular
movements of the conjugated aptamer layer and polymer subunits
under high temperature conditions. DPA micro-particles were
larger in size than DP micro-particles due to aptamer conjugation,
and they demonstrated a lesser degree of sensitivity to temperature
variations. DPA formulation showed a higher thermal stability
with limited potential for aggregation than DP over the same
temperature range, and this is partly due to inter-particle repulsion
existing between electronegative DPA aptamer outer layers. Also,
DNA aptamer molecules on the DPA exterior possess strong
phosphodiester backbones that enhance its thermal stability and,
thus, enable it to un-anneal/re-anneal repeatedly with an
increasing temperature.
DPAP
formulation
maintained
a
fairly
constant
average
hydrodynamic size in the range of 834.7–888.9 nm for 25, 37,
and 42 8C, except at 30 8C, which showed an increment to
1 333 nm. The polymeric chain dynamics, particle mobility,
hydrophilic, and hydrophobic chains, and adhesion strength of
DPAP micro-particles were less susceptible to temperature
changes. This also supports that DPAP formulation holds a high
lower critical solution temperature (LCST) with less dehydration.
Hence, DPAP particulate system demonstrated a higher degree of
resistance to temperature compared to the others. Figure 7 shows
the average hydrodynamic size of both DPA and DPAP formula-
tion peaked at 30 8C. This demonstrates that 30 8C is the optimal
temperature point that induces polymer aggregation and swelling
due increased internal energy, entropy, and energetic interactions
as well as higher solution diffused into the formulations.[23,24] The
signiﬁcant decrease in the average hydrodynamic size of DPA and
DPAP were observed beyond 30 8C, indicating the initiation of
polymer hydrolysis, which corresponds with the gradual transi-
tion from the bulk polymer swelling phase. Pre and post swelling
DPAP particles demonstrated more consistent average hydrody-
namic sizes, allowing DPAP to carry and release drug molecules
effectively over a wide temperature range in mammalian system.
Effect of Ionic Strength on the Size and Zeta Potential Stability of
DPAP Particulate System
Ionic strength measures the total concentration or conductivity of
ionic species in a solution. In this work, varying concentrations of
NaCl solution were added to DPAP suspensions to increase ionic
strength and provide counter-cations and -anions to interact with
cationic DPAP. Consequently, the added Cl- ions interacted
electrostatically with positively charged DPAP micro-particles,
lowering its hydrophilicity. Figure 8 shows that the average D[4,3]
hydrodynamic size of DPAP particles increased signiﬁcantly with
increasing ionic strength from 20 mM to 1 M NaCl. By increasing
ionic strength, high concentrations of highly electronegative
chloride ions bind onto DPAP particle surface, making it more
hydrophobic DPAP with a reduced electrical charge for repulsion.
This subsequently induces aggregation between neighbouring
particles, eventually causing more DPAP to coalesce. Naþ ions
provide an electrostatic shielding mechanism to DPAP particles
and control cell membrane interactions with DPAP particles. The
higher conductivity of the Naþ medium facilitates stewarded
diffusion of drug molecules from the DPAP matrix. Work by Sang
et al.[25] demonstrates that the addition of NaCl can enhance the
structural stability of polymeric compound and polyplex with
large particle sizes for improved transfection efﬁciency.
DPAP formulation is a pH stimuli-dependent system that
receives or releases protons in response to surrounding pH
changes. DPAP solubility can be altered by modifying its surface
charge characteristics as a result of its polyelectrolytic property.
Figure 9 shows that DPAP zeta potential is not signiﬁcantly
affected by the ionic strength variation between 20 mM and 1 M
NaCl. This demonstrates that the characteristic surface charge
stability and ionization of DPAP micro-particles were not
signiﬁcantly affected by the presence of Naþ and Cl- ions as the
Figure 8. Hydrodynamic size stability of DPAP formulation under varying
ionic strengths of 20, 10, 500 mM, and 1 M NaCl.
Figure 7. Average D[4,3] hydrodynamic size of DP, DPA, and DPAP
particulate system under varying temperature conditions of 25, 30, 37, and
42 8C.
1249
VOLUME 97, 2019
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
VOLUME 9999, 2018
zeta potential was maintained in a narrow range from þ8.5 to
þ10.1 mV. The net electropositive zeta potential is due to the Naþ
shielding conformation. The slight ﬂuctuation in the surface
charge can be explained by the increasing Naþ concentration,
creating a dense monolayer shielding effect. Further increase in
the ionic strength results in Naþ saturation, resulting in some
weak cooperative bindings and complex dissociation. This
explains the decreasing zeta potential at 1 M NaCl ionic strength.
The experimental results strongly support that the surface of DPAP
particulate system is positively charged due to the intercalation of
cationic PEI as the outer layer of DPAP formulation, potentially
resulting in effective electrostatic interaction with desired cell
membranes, improved internalization, higher transfection efﬁ-
ciency, and cellular uptake of active ingredients for better
intracellular therapeutic indices.
Effect of Ionic Strength on BSA Drug and Aptamer Release
UV-visible spectrophotometric analysis was used to determine the
release characteristics of DPAP under varying ionic strength
conditions of 20, 500, and 1 000 mM NaCl. The concentrations of
BSA and aptamer were measured at wavelengths of A260 nm and
A280 nm, respectively. Table 1 shows the relative amounts of free
DNA aptamer and BSA released under different NaCl concen-
trations. The maximum concentration of free DNA aptamer
released into solution was 0.937 2 mg/ml under 20 mM NaCl
ionic strength. Similar concentrations of free aptamer were
detected in solution for 500 mM and 1 M NaCl ionic strengths.
Under low ionic strength conditions, more aptamer and BSA
molecules are released into solution, and this is a result of the
electrostatic attractive pull from the positively charged medium.
Naþ acts as a chaotropic agent that interferes molecular
interactions including Van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonding,
and hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. As a result, the
conformational structure of DPAP is disrupted to induce release of
encapsulated molecules. A low ionic strength is sufﬁcient enough
to affect the degradation rate and surface charge stability of DPAP
micro-particles. Under this condition, weak electrostatic forces are
established between
PEI
particles
and
aptamer molecules,
facilitating their release into the surrounding medium. By
increasing NaCl ionic strength concentration, Naþ shielding
intensiﬁes, creating a cationic membrane that restricts the release
of more aptamer molecules into solution. Also, excess Naþ ions
generated under high ionic strength conditions interact with the
anionic aptamer molecules, thus lowering the concentration of
free aptamer molecules released.
The concentration of free BSA molecules released into solution
under varying ionic strength conditions was negligible relative to
the concentration of encapsulated BSA. This demonstrates the
efﬁcacy of the double-shielding effect provided by the multi-
layered co-polymeric DPAP formulation as the BSA molecules are
entrapped within the innermost PLGA core of the DPAP system,
and are, therefore, not readily affected by increasing ionic
strength. The low concentrations of BSA measured in the solution
could be the result of loosely entrapped BSA molecules on the
PLGA polymeric surface that passively diffused into solution. The
data is particularly important to support the potential resistive
features of DPAP towards variations in physiological ionic
conditions.
Thermogravimetric Analysis of DP and DPAP Micro-particle
Both
thermogravimetric
analysis
and
differential
scanning
calorimetric analysis were used to study the thermal stability
of DP and DPAP micro-particles. Figure 10a shows the mass loss
data for both lyophilized DP and DPAP particles, and 10b show
the exothermic peaks of DP and DPAP formulations. The
exothermic peak analysis is used to determine the manner of
oxidation, decomposition, and crystallization. Typically, sharp
melting peaks occur over a narrow range of temperature when
crystallization occurs.[26] Figure 10b demonstrates that the
decompositions of both DP and DPAP micro-particles have a
steep declining slope of heat ﬂow at the early stage. From the
TGA and DSC data it can be seen that the primary heat-
stimulated event is the particulate decomposition, occurring at
225 8C. Both formulations entered a melting phase from 300–
480 8C, as shown in Figure 10a. These ﬁndings are in correspond
with the results reported in the literature.[27–28] Saliba et al.[27]
reported that PLGA polymeric particles showed complete mass
loss of 100 % over the temperature range of 247–378 8C,
indicating that the observed mass loss of DP and DPAP micro-
particles could be the result of PLGA degradation.[27] Another
study reported PLGA decomposition occurring in the tempera-
ture range of 280–360 8C.[28]
TGA/DSC curves for both DP and DPAP micro-particles are
similar, showing identical PLGA core polymer chain mobility. The
strong attractive forces between the polymeric particles and
Figure 9. Effect of ionic strength on the zeta potential stability of DPAP
formulation. Different ionic strengths were established using 20, 100,
500 mM, and 1 M NaCl.
Table 1. Release analysis of BSA drug and thrombin-speciﬁc aptamer under varying NaCl concentrations
NaCl concentration
(mM)
Concentration of DNA aptamer at A260 nm
(mg/mL)
Standard
deviation
Concentration of BSA protein at A280 nm
(mg/mL)
Standard
deviation
20
0.9372
0.0033
0.1900
0.0058
500
0.6633
0.0033
0.2100
0.0006
1000
0.6006
0.0019
0.1900
3.400 0E-17
VOLUME 97, 2019
1250
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

VOLUME 9999, 2018
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
1
the aptamer/BSA molecules are critical to thermal stability.
The melting temperature of BSA is reported to be in the range of
56–69 8C, and its melting phase can be observed with an
endothermic peak.[29] However, this peak was not present in
the TGA/DSC curves for both DP and DPAP formulations around
this temperature range, suggesting that BSA was protected by the
PLGA core.
Figure 10a shows similarity in mass loss for both DP (red line)
and DPAP (black line) over the temperature range of 300–460 8C,
with approximately 83.70 % (7.7 mg) and 77.25 % (7.1 mg)
mass loss for DP and DPAP respectively. However, the total mass
loss for DPAP is lower than DP, demonstrating a slightly better
thermal stability. It has previously been reported that PEI
TGA analysis showed a mass loss in the temperature range of
310–410 8C.[30] Hence, it is believed that PEI complexation is
capable of improving the decomposition temperature of DPAP and
enhance its thermal stability and biomolecular shielding efﬁcacy.
Glass transition temperature, Tg, is an important parameter to
determine the supersaturation threshold of a polymeric disper-
sion where it remains in a glassy stage under Tg and melts into
viscous liquid phase above this temperature. The Tg values of DP
and DPAP micro-particles were determined as 39.33 and
38.93 8C, respectively. High Tg values are desirable for efﬁcient
storage and physical stability at room temperature (20 8C),
easier handling, and better drug dissolution.[31] Tg values of DP
and DPAP are similar with a negligible difference of 1 8C. The
slight difference could be due to the polyplex nature of DPAP.[32]
In Vitro BSA Release Profile of DPAP Formulation
The in vitro drug release proﬁle of DPAP formulation was
investigated over a pH range of 6–8 at 37 8C and 150 rpm shaking
speed. Figure 11 shows no initial burst release of drug molecules
after the ﬁrst 24 h at 37 8C, demonstrating the capability of the
DPAP formulation to harbor and retain the drug molecules
without premature diffusive escape. The drug release proﬁles
proceeded with a plateau for the different pH systems. The
experimental results indicate that the release pattern of encapsu-
lated drug molecules is highly dependent on the molecular
properties of the drug and degradation mechanism of the DPAP
formulation. Hence, the presence of internal pores and composi-
tion of the polymeric particles largely affect the diffusion rate of
drug molecules to achieve a sustained release proﬁle whilst the
degradation rate of the outermost polymeric layer deﬁnes the
initial burst release of encapsulated drugs from the DPAP
formulation. Protonation and deprotonation of aptameric linkage
with the PEI polymeric layer can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the
degradation rate of DPAP formulation at different pH levels. A
signiﬁcant protonation of PEI occurs under acidic pH, which
impacts the linkages between the aptamer and PEI layer, resulting
in enhanced DPAP degradation.[33,34] The degree of protonation
and subsequent weakening of aptamer-PEI linkage decreases with
an increasing pH. Hence, the effect of pH is critical to maintaining
the desired release kinetics of DPAP formulation.
The present work focuses on the development and characteri-
zation of DPAP multi-layered formulation design to understand
the microenvironments of drug/aptamer molecules and the
parameters driving degradation under hydrolytic conditions.
The ﬁndings from this work would be useful in engineering
molecular interactions between the polymeric construct and
cellular materials in order to optimize targeting events. The DPAP
incorporates
an
aptameric
ligand
for
enhanced
molecular
Figure 10. TGA and DSC analysis of DP and DPAP formulations: (a) mass
loss analysis of DP and DPAP micro-particles; and (b) differential enthalpy
data for DP and DPAP formulations.
Figure 11. In vitro release of BSA drug molecules from the DPAP
formulation in PBS buffer at 37 8C and over a pH range of 6–8. The drug
release was monitored at speciﬁc intervals of 4.5 h in day 1 and every 24 h
intervals from days 2–13.
1251
VOLUME 97, 2019
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2
THE CANADIAN JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
VOLUME 9999, 2018
targeting of malignant cells. Whilst the data suggest the signiﬁcant
potential of DPAP for use in drug delivery, more in vivo work is
required to validate pre-clinical efﬁcacy and cell-speciﬁc targeting
capability of DPAP.
CONCLUSION
The work reports the synthesis and characterization of an
enhanced delivery system combining functional biophysical
attributes
of
aptamer
and
biopolymeric
particles
to
form
multifunctional DPAP micro-particles. Layer-by-layer DLS analy-
sis validated the synthesis of DPAP particulates with tailored
D[4,3] average hydrodynamic size and positively charged surface
for enhanced targeting and intracellular uptake at malignant sites.
The DPAP system demonstrated to be pH-dependent, indicating its
modiﬁable endosomal degradation kinetics to release encapsu-
lated drugs in a controlled delivery mechanism. DPAP micro-
particles also showed stability under varying physiological
temperature. The high encapsulation efﬁciency, strong binding
strength, and high decomposition temperature of DPAP demon-
strate
an
effective
polymeric
vehicle
that provides
strong
protection and shielding characteristics to its payload from harsh
physiological environment as well as prevent drug leakage and
initial burst release. The multilayer DPAP formulation can be
molecularly engineered to carry different active biomolecules and
aptamers in unique compartments of its structural architecture to
simultaneously target various malignant cells. In vitro release data
shows the controlled and sustained drug release proﬁles under
varying pH conditions, and that pH is an inﬂuential parameter in
maintaining speciﬁc drug release characteristics. Nonetheless,
further in vivo investigations of DPAP formulation are mandatory
to prove its efﬁcacy in mammalian systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors sincerely thank the Ministry of Higher Education
(Malaysia) for providing the ﬁnancial support for this project
through the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) FRGS/
1/2014/SKK07/CURTIN/02/1.
REFERENCES
[1] A. V. Singh, M. Sitti, Curr. Pharm. Design 2016, 22, 1418.
[2] M. Gidwani, A. V. Singh, Curr. Pharm. Biotechno. 2014, 14,
1201.
[3] C. Dwivedi, I. Pandey, H. Pandey, S. Patil, S. B. Mishra, A. C.
Pandey, P. Zamboni, P. W. Ramteke, A. V. Singh, J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. A 2018, 106, 641.
[4] A. V. Singh, Z. Hosseinidoust, B. W. Park, O. Yasa, M. Sitti,
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 9759.
[5] A. V. Singh, K. K. Mehta, Curr. Pharm. Design 2016, 22, 1534.
[6] A. V. Lakhin, V. Z. Tarantul, L. V. Gening, Acta Naturae
2013, 5, 34.
[7] M. Alibolandi, M. Ramezani, F. Sadeghi, K. Abnous, F.
Hadizadeh, Int. J. Pharmaceut. 2015, 479, 241.
[8] A. Aravind, P. Jeyamohan, R. Nair, S. Veeranarayanan, Y.
Nagaoka, Y. Yoshida, T. Maekawa, D. S. Kumar, Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 2012, 109, 2920.
[9] J. Guo, X. Gao, L. Su, H. Xia, G. Gu, Z. Pang, X. Jiang, L. Yao,
J. Chen, H. Chen, Biomaterials 2011, 32, 8010.
[10] K. Min, H. Jo, K. Song, M. Cho, Y.-S. Chun, S. Jon, W. J. Kim,
C. Ban, Biomaterials 2011, 32, 2124.
[11] E. Sayari, M. Dinarvand, M. Amini, M. Azhdarzadeh, E.
Mollarazi, Z. Ghasemi, F. Atyabi, Int. J. Pharmaceut. 2014,
473, 304.
[12] A. V. Singh, M. Batuwangala, R. Mundra, K. Mehta, S. Patke,
E. Falletta, R. Patil, W. N. Gade, ACS Appl. Mater. Inter. 2014,
6, 14679.
[13] J. Cheng, B. A. Teply, I. Sheriﬁ, J. Sung, G. Luther, F. X. Gu,
E. Levy-Nissenbaum, A. F. Radovic-Moreno, R. Langer, O. C.
Farokhzad, Biomaterials 2007, 28, 869.
[14] J. Novotny, M. Handschumacher, E. Haber, R. E. Bruccoleri,
W. B. Carlson, D. W. Fanning, J. A. Smith, G. D. Rose, P.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1986, 83, 226.
[15] K. X. Tan, M. K. Danquah, A. Sidhu, S. Y. Lau, C. M.
Ongkudon, Biotechnol. Progr. 2017, 34, 249.
[16] H. K. Makadia, S. J. Siegel, Polymers 2011, 3, 1377.
[17] L. Li, D. Xiang, S. Shigdar, W. Yang, Q. Li, J. Lin, K. Liu, W.
Duan, Int. J. Nanomed. 2014, 9, 1083.
[18] R. Benjaminsen, M. A. Mattebjerg, J. R. Henriksen, S. M.
Moghimi, T. L. Andresen, American Society of Gene & Cell
Therapy 2013, 21, 149.
[19] D. N. Nguyen, S. S. Raghavan, L. M. Tashima, E. C. Lin, S. J.
Fredette, R. S. Langer, C. Wang, Biomaterials 2008, 29, 2783.
[20] S. Tripathi, A. Garcia, G. Makhatadze, J. Phys. Chem. B 2015,
119, 13103.
[21] S. Y. Kim, Particle Microstructure and Polymer Dynamics in
Concentrated Polymer Solutions, PhD thesis, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 2011, p. 69.
[22] S. De, D. H. Robinson, AAPS PharmSciTech 2004, 5, 18.
[23] D. Ahmed, M. Saeed, International Journal of Advanced
Biological and Biomedical Research 2013, 1, 1614.
[24] M. H. Mondal, M. Mukherjee, Macromolecules 2008, 41,
8753.
[25] Y. Sang, K. Xie, Y. Mu, Y. Lei, B. Zhang, S. Xiong, Y. Chen, N.
Qi, Cytotechnology 2015, 67, 67.
[26] T. Hatakeyama, F. X. Quinn, Thermal Analysis: Fundamen-
tals and Applications to Polymer Science, Wiley, Hoboken
1999.
[27] J. B. Saliba, A. A. G. Faraco, M. I. Yoshida, W. L. d.
Vasconcelos, A. D. Silva-Cunha, H. S. Mansur, Materials
Research 2008, 11, 207.
[28] Y. Yu, L. Kong, L. Li, N. Li, P. Yan, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2015,
10, 1044.
[29] A. Michnik, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2003, 71, 509.
[30] Y.-P. Huang, I. J. Lin, C.-C. Chen, Y.-C. Hsu, C.-C. Chang, M.-
J. Lee, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2013, 8, 267.
[31] N. Jadhav, G. L. Vinod, N. J. Karthik, K. Hanmantrao, Asian
Journal of Pharmaceutics 2009, 3, 82.
[32] I. M. Kalogeras, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 2011, 42, 470.
[33] S. Choosakoonkriang, B. A. Lobo, G. S. Koe, J. G. Koe, C. R.
Middaugh, J. Pharm. Sci. 2003, 92, 1710.
[34] K. Utsuno, H. Uludag, Biophys. J. 2010, 99, 201.
Manuscript received September 19, 2017; revised manuscript
received June 8, 2018; accepted for publication July 20, 2018.
VOLUME 97, 2019
1252
 1939019x, 2019, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.23389 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License