Skip to Article Content
Skip to Article Information
Search term
IET HUB HOME
Journals
IET PRIZE PROGRAMME
NEW JOURNAL LAUNCHES
VIRTUAL COLLECTIONS
Visit IET
In vitro degradation of poly (D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles loaded with linamarin
Abstract
Linamarin-loaded poly (lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles (NPs) were prepared by the double emulsion solvent evaporation technique. The formulated PLGA (50:50) and PLGA (85:15) NPs were spherically shaped, having an average particle size < 190 nm, drug entrapment efficiency (50–52%) and zeta potentials ranging from −25 to −30 mV. Interestingly, all formulated PLGA NPs exhibited a controlled biphasic release profile. Polymer degradation was investigated in the current research to determine the major degradation products and then the polymer biocompatibility as well as safety. The PLGA NPs degradation behaviour was investigated by measuring water uptake, mass loss, change of pH of the degradation medium, morphological changes, and lactic and glycolic acid concentrations. Gravimetrical methods, pH meter, scanning electron microscope and high-performance liquid chromatography were employed, respectively. PLGA (50:50) NPs were found to degrade faster than PLGA (85:15) NPs. With regard to water uptake, mass loss and pH change, the degradation behaviour of PLGA (50:50) NPs was significantly ( ρ < 0.05) different from that of PLGA (85:15) NPs. A complete degradation of PLGA (50:50) NPs was achieved after 102 days, whereas, only about 60% of PLGA (85:15) NPs were degraded within the same period. Complete degradation and release of the degradation products naturally by the body ensures safety of the delivery carrier.
1 Introduction
Owing to the multiple limitations of conventional drugs, such as solubility, low bioavailability, compatibility and toxicity, there have been strong efforts in the development of polymeric drug delivery systems. Although these delivery systems might be biodegradable or non-biodegradable, the latter has gained less attention. An ideal polymer to be used in drug delivery systems should be biocompatible, biodegradable and non-toxic [ 1 , 2 ]. The applications of biodegradable polymers in the biomedical field for controlled drug delivery have received significant interest in the past few decades. Among the biodegradable polymers, polyesters have been the most widely investigated ones. Among the polyesters, polylactide, polyglycolide and their copolymers are the most popular choices as carriers because of their good degradation as well as their approval for clinical use [ 3 - 5 ]. The PLGA copolymer undergoes degradation in aqueous mediums for both in vitro and in vivo through the cleavage of its backbone ester linkage [ 6 ]. A good understanding of the biodegradation phenomenon and an approval of the cellular and tissue responses are fundamental prerequisites in designing and developing any successful biodegradable delivery system containing drugs. Furthermore, to assess the drug release kinetics of any drug delivery system, it is mandatory to characterise its degradation and erosion behaviour. Since a change in the surface area of the colloid takes place as soon as the degradation process starts, it is essential to control the degradation rate to ensure an even dosage delivery of the drugs [ 7 ].
Generally, degradation rates of the polyesters depend on many factors including type and component of polyester, molecular weight, molecular weight distribution, crystallinity as well as macroscopic geometry [ 8 ]. An important prerequisite for the hydrolytic degradation of the polymeric devices is their wetting behaviour. Release of the drugs from these devices was found to be controlled by diffusion and an erosion mechanism. After incubation of the nanoparticles (NPs) into the dissolution medium, desorption of the surface bound drug occurs first followed by diffusion of both water into and linamarin out from the NPs, which mainly take place through the NPs walls. As the process continues, the degradation process will predominate because of chain relaxation and the formation of more pores on the surfaces of the NPs. Water penetration and contact angle are the most important factors in describing the wettability of the delivery device [ 9 ]. The complete degradation of the polymeric NPs into water soluble degradation products, such as lactic and glycolic acids, observed in this study after 3 months ensures a complete release of the encapsulated drug from the matrix. This degradation also ensures easy excretion of the degradation products from the body through natural pathways, and, consequently, the safety of the delivery system.
Linamarin (α-hydroxyisobutyronitrile-β-D-glucose) is a cyanogenic glucoside found in the leaves and roots of plants, such as lima beans, flax and abundantly in the cassava plant ( Manihot esculenta Crantz ). Linamarin is a water-soluble molecule and can be hydrolysed by acid or enzyme to liberate a toxic chemical ‘hydrogen cyanide’ (HCN), which is the main source of toxicity of linamarin if found in high concentrations. Some previous researches have proven that linamarin exhibits a good cytotoxicity effect towards HT29, MCH-7 and HL-60 [ 10 , 11 ]. This cytotoxicity has been mainly attributed to the toxic HCN that is liberated from the hydrolysis of linamarin. Therefore this HCN can also harm normal (healthy) cells if both the dosage form and administration of linamarin is not well formulated. To circumvent this problem, linamarin has been encapsulated into PLGA NPs to control its release, and, consequently, toxicity. The main objective of the current research is to investigate the degradation behaviour of the formulated linamarin loaded PLGA NPs to ensure complete release of the hosted drug as well as the safety of the delivery system. The selection of PLGA (50:50) and PLGA (85:15) copolymers was because they have been the most investigated copolymers in drug delivery systems. They also provide an opportunity to investigate the effect of changing (lactide (LA)/glycolide(GA)) composition on the PLGA degradation.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Materials
Poly (DL-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) with two molar ratios L/G = (50:50), MW 40 000–75 000; and L/G = (85:15), MW 50 000–75 000; polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), average MW 16 000 and 98% hydrolysed; and dichloromethane (DCM) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Poole, UK). Linamarin was delivered by AG Scientific (USA).
2.2 Preparation of the NPs
Linamarin loaded NPs were prepared using a double emulsion solvent evaporation (w/o/w) technique [ 12 - 16 ]. DCM and PVA were employed in this research as organic solvent and surfactant, respectively. The first emulsion (w/o) was prepared by adding an aqueous solution of the drug (linamarin) to an organic solution of the polymer (PLGA) previously mixed with surfactant solution then homogenised for 3 min (Heidolph DIAX 900, Germany). The first emulsion was then introduced into a new aqueous solution of the surfactant and homogenised for another 3 min to obtain the double emulsion (w/o/w). After evaporation of the organic solvent, the suspensions were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm to separate the NPs (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R, Germany), washed well using distilled water to remove any free drug and/or PVA. Finally, the NPs were frozen for 20 h and freeze dried for 36 h (EPSILON 18D Freeze Dryer, Denmark).
2.3 Drug release
The drug release was investigated by placing a weighted sample into stoppered conical flasks containing phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, incubated at 37°C and centrifugation rate at 150 rpm. At predetermined time intervals, a sample was taken from the release medium, centrifuged and 1 ml of the supernatant was taken for analysis and the removed volume was replaced by a fresh buffer. Concentration of linamarin released was measured spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of 545 nm (Spectronic Genesys TM and PC Model 336003, Spectronic Instruments, USA). Each recorded data were an average of three replicates ( n = 3).
2.4 In vitro degradation of the NPs
The polymer degradation process was investigated by determining the change in the surface morphology, water uptake, mass loss, change in the pH of the release medium, concentration of lactic and glycolic acids in the medium. Simply, each sample of NPs was divided into 10 mg batches, and each batch was placed in screw-capped vials containing 4 ml of 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH (7.4) and incubated at 37°C with a constant shaking rate of 150 rpm.
2.4.1 Water uptake and mass loss
2.4.2 Change of pH
The pH variation of the drug release medium was investigated to determine its physiological activity on the body. At different predetermined time intervals, the pH of the medium (see Section 2.3) was directly measured using a pH meter (pH 526 Multical, WTW, Weilheim, Germany). Each recorded data were an average of three replicates ( n = 3).
2.4.3 Determination of the concentrations of lactic and glycolic acids
To accurately define the degradation process of the PLGA NPs, a simultaneous determination of the main degradation products was also performed. Only the PLGA (50:50) copolymer was employed for this test and concentrations of the degradation products with time were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). At predetermined time intervals, the sample batch (see Section 2.3) was removed and centrifuged. The supernatant containing water-soluble degradation products was used for HPLC. Meanwhile, 1 ml of the released medium was centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatant filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane filter. A volume of 20 µl sample was injected into the HPLC (Shimadzu LC-10AS Liquid Chromatography, Japan) using organic column packed with 9 µm polystyrene divinylbenzene ion exchange resin (Aminex HPX-87H; 300 mm × 7.8 mm, Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA). The column operated at 65°C, mobile phase (0.009 N sulphuric acid), flow rate of 0.7 ml/min, and a UV detector of λ 220 nm, which was determined from the preliminary scanning of best absorbance wavelength. The concentrations of LA and GA were determined by integrating the peak areas using a calibration curve of standard solutions of LA and GA. Each recorded data were an average of three replicates ( n = 3).
2.4.4 Morphological changes
At predetermined time intervals, sample batches (see Section 2.3) were removed; centrifuged and separated NPs were freeze dried. The freeze-dried NPs were stuck onto aluminium stubs using a double-sided adhesive carbon tape and coated with gold–palladium (Baltec SC030 Sputter Coater, Germany). The surface morphology of the NPs was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM; Philips XL30 ESEM, the Netherlands). Micrographs were taken of different representative areas of the sample on each stub.
3 Results and discussion
The formulated linamarin-loaded PLGA NPs were spherically shaped; unimodal with average size ranged from 160 to 186 nm (Fig. 1 ). The observed zeta potentials ranging from − 25 to −30 mV indicate relatively good stability of the formulated PLGA in their emulsions. Linamarin was physically incorporated with PLGA and most of the drug was encapsulated into the NPs core surrounded by the polymer; however, some linamarin molecules were attached onto the NPs surfaces. However, most of the water soluble drugs like linamarin suffer low drug encapsulation efficiency (DEE), it is good that our PLGA NPs exhibited reasonably high DEE (> 50%). NPs with high DEE ensure that small quantity of NPs is required to convey a sufficient drug concentration.
Fig. 1 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Particle size measurement using dynamic light scattering with an average size of 168 nm
Particle size measurement using dynamic light scattering with an average size of 168 nm
3.1 Drug release
Interestingly, all the three different formulations, two from PLGA (50:50) NPs and one from PLGA (85:15) NPs exhibited some burst release followed by controlled drug release profiles that lasted for days (Fig. 2 ). Since drug release mostly starts by diffusion process, thus the DEE might also be indirectly related to degradation of PLGA. Desorption of the surface bound drug, as well as diffusion of the encapsulated drug molecules from the NPs, creates more channels and/or pores on the surface of the NPs. No doubt this will improve the diffusion of more water into the NPs, release more of the drug molecules, and, finally, lead to degradation of the polymer. Thus, complete degradation of the biodegradable polymeric delivery systems, such as PLGA NPs, ensures the release of the entire entrapped drug from the NPs as well as the fate of the polymer and its degradation products. Polymer degradation into biocompatible end products ensures the elimination of these degradation products from the body, and, finally, the safety of the delivery system. Therefore a good understanding of the polymer degradation is a prerequisite for successful development of any polymeric drug delivery system designed for controlled release.
Fig. 2 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Drug release profiles of two batches of PLGA (50:50 NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
Drug release profiles of two batches of PLGA (50:50 NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
3.2 Degradation of PLGA NPs
Three formulated batches, two of PLGA (50:50) NPs and one PLGA (85:15) NPs were employed in the current research to investigate the polymer degradation behaviour. These two copolymers were selected to study the effect of changing the polymer composition (hydrophobicity) based on the LA/GA ratios on the degradation process. Accordingly, water uptake, mass loss, pH changes, concentration of degradation products (lactic and glycolic acids) and morphology changes of the PLGA NPs were examined.
3.2.1 Water uptake
Generally, the incubated NPs swell by water from the surrounding medium, and drug molecules diffuse out of the particles. Consequently, polymer degradation starts, and, thus, the greater the swelling the more degradable the polymer will be. Thus, water uptake is a good gravimetrical technique to determine the wettability and degradability of a polymeric delivery system. The water uptake profile is shown in Fig. 3 where it is obvious that there is an initial period of slow water uptake, which lasted for nearly 1 week for both batches of PLGA (50:50) (a) and (b) NPs and one batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs. In the second week, the water uptake values were about 10.5, 11.8 and 8.7% for PLGA (50:50) (a) and (b) NPs and PLGA (85:15) NPs, respectively. The increase in water uptake was slow until the third week of incubation where the values were 20.2, 22.1 and 14.7%; for PLGA (50:50) NPs batch (a), batch (b) and PLGA (85:15) NPs batch, respectively. However, the water uptake values of 47.5 and 49.2% were observed after 6 weeks for PLGA (50:50) batch (a) and batch (b), respectively; on the other hand, only 27.4% water uptake was observed for the PLGA (85:15) batch at the same incubation time. The water uptake of PLGA (50:50) NPs is significantly different ( ρ < 0.05) from that of their counterpart PLGA (85:15) NPs.
Fig. 3 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Water uptake profiles of two batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
Water uptake profiles of two batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
The enhanced water uptake observed for the PLGA (50:50) NPs, as compared with that of PLGA (85:15), may mainly be attributed to the enhanced wettability of the polymer as a result of the great hydrophilicity and amorphous property of the former sample. The hydrophilicity of PLGA (50:50) is mainly because of its greater hydrophilic glycolide moiety (50%), compared with only 15% for PLGA (85:15). The water uptake by a polymeric matrix is also influenced by the ratio of its crystalline to amorphous regions as the amorphous regions are more easily hydrolysable [ 20 ].
3.2.2 Mass loss
The mass loss technique is a simple but rather effective technique to characterise the erosion of a biodegradable polymeric matrix. As the mass loss profile is linear for surface eroding devices only, mass loss profiles allow an immediate assessment of the type of erosion that a polymer matrix is undergoing, that is, whether it is surface or bulk erosion [ 21 ]. It was generally stated that during the early stages of the degradation process, only a decrease in the molecular weight of the polymer takes place, without any significant weight loss. Moreover, the polymer degrades to a critical molecular weight, and its produced water-soluble fragments will be released into the surrounding aqueous medium [ 22 ]. The profiles of mass loss for both batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs and one batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs, as a function of the incubation (hydrolysis) time carried out in this research, are shown in Fig. 4 .
Fig. 4 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Mass loss profiles of two batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
Mass loss profiles of two batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
It is clear that there is an initial period of no weight loss that lasted for 1 week (induction stage) for all three batches where no soluble products formed, then followed by a little reduction in mass of the NPs. Meanwhile, considerable mass losses were observed (36.8 and 40.7%) at the third week and (58.8 and 56.3%) at the fifth week of incubation for PLGA (50:50) (a) and (b) batches, respectively. The mass loss observed with PLGA (85:15) NPs was only 18.8% at third week and 41% at fifth week of incubation. At the end of the sixth week of incubation the masses remaining for the PLGA (50:50) NPs were only 31.7% (68.3% mass loss) for batch (a) and 35.4% (64.6% mass loss) for batch (b). However, for the PLGA (85:15) NPs, about 51.2% of the mass remained (only 41.8% mass loss) after 6 weeks of incubation. These results indicate that PLGA (50:50) copolymer degrades and loses mass faster than PLGA (85:15). The measured mass loss of PLGA (50:50) NPs is significantly different ( ρ < 0.05) from that of the PLGA (85:15) NPs. Our results are in accordance with the degradation order that was reported previously as 50:50 > 75:25 > 85:15 at all time-points beyond a week [ 23 ]. Other similar findings were also previously reported when a fast mass loss calculated of about (80%) for the PLGA (50:50) microspheres was observed after the seventh week of incubation, as compared with only 10 and 1% for PLGA (75:25) and poly(D,L-lactide) (PDLLA) microspheres, respectively [ 24 ].
Generally, in the first phase of degradation, a significant amount of water-soluble low-molecular-weight oligomers are formed. Later, these degradation products diffuse out from the polymer matrix, and, consequently, this leads to mass loss. Diffusion of the produced water-soluble oligomers also leads to the formation of more pores on the NPs surface, and, as a result, more water molecules penetrate [ 19 ]. Thus, as the process continues, more water uptake and mass loss are detected. High molecular weight fractions remain water-insoluble until a critical molecular weight is reached where they become water-soluble and then start to diffuse. Thus, the water-solubility of a polymer determines when its mass loss and erosion and degradation would take place. Owing to the fact that great mass loss starts from the 2nd half of the degradation process, our samples are considered to undergo bulk degradation rather than surface eroding. Several previous studies have also stated that PLGA is a bulk-degradable copolymer [ 6 , 19 , 25 ]. Interestingly, in line with these earlier findings, the samples of the present investigation, exhibited a noticeable mass loss because of degradation starting from the third week, especially for PLGA (50:50). From all these findings it could be said that mass loss decreases with the increasing lactide content in the copolymer because of the increase in copolymer hydrophobicity.
3.2.3 Change of pH of the degradation medium
A particular feature of the PLGA degradation is the formation of acidic degradation products, namely, lactic and glycolic acids. Accumulation of these acidic monomers increases acidity and reduces the pH of the medium [ 20 , 26 ]. Therefore the change in pH of the degradation medium was also investigated, as shown in Fig. 5 . A great change in pH might affect the living cells (the smallest basic structural and functional unit of all known living organisms). It may also affect degradation of the polymer and thus release of the encapsulated drug as well as its kinetic mechanism. It is important to note that PLGA is polyester and its hydrolytic degradation is known to be catalysed by protons. This means that in highly acidic mediums, the polymer degradation increases leading to a greater reduction in the pH and acidity of the medium. Thus, increasing pH (increasing basicity) of the incubation medium would slightly decrease the degradation rate of the polymer [ 27 ]. Therefore the pH of the medium should be carefully monitored to be within the acceptable physiological limits to ensure that the activity of both the cells and enzymes are not altered since both are non-monotonic pH dependent.
Fig. 5 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Decrease in pH with the degradation behaviour of two batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
Decrease in pH with the degradation behaviour of two batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs (—ο—) (—•—) and a batch of PLGA (85:15) NPs (—Δ—) as function of the incubation time
Generally, a decrease in the pH with incubation time was observed for all three batches (two PLGA (50:50) and one PLGA (85:15) NPs). For the 1st week, the pH change was small because of the limited formation of water-soluble oligomers, while starting from the second week, a notable decrease was observed, especially for PLGA (50:50) NPs. This decrease in pH is mainly because of the formation of aqueous oligomers, such as L-lactic acid, D-lactic acid and glycolic acid. Since these degradation products are acidic and retained in the incubation medium, then any polymer degradation will result in a further reduction in pH. After 3 weeks of incubation, the reduction in pH was from 7.4 to 7.1, 7.1 and 7.2 for PLGA (50:50) NPs batches of (a) and (b) and PLGA (85:15), respectively. By the end of the sixth week of incubation, the final pH values were 6.8, 6.7 and 7.1 for PLGA (50:50) NPs batches of (a) and (b) and PLGA (85:15), respectively. The change in pH observed with PLGA (50:50) NPs is significantly different ( ρ < 0.05) from that of their counterpart PLGA (85:15) NPs.
Since the change in pH results from the acidic degradation products, the slow decrease in the pH observed for the PLGA (85:15) NPs compared with the PLGA (50:50) NPs could mainly be attributed to the slow water uptake and degradation rate of the former polymer. However, the change in pH observed in this current research (from 7.4 to the range of 6.7–7.1) is considered unlikely to alter the body biological activity; the authors believe that more control of the pH is still required. This could be achieved by changing the polymer composition, which, consequently, will modify the polymer degradation, or by adding a pH modifier that should be biologically safe (does not harm healthy cells) to maintain the pH within the physiological limits regardless of the polymer degradation.
3.2.4 Determination of lactic and glycolic acids
PLGA (50:50) NPs have been employed to determine the major polymer degradation products. The HPLC results confirmed that the major PLGA degradation products are lactic and glycolic acids. The chemical structure, general degradation process and degradation products of the PLGA copolymer are shown in Fig. 6 . The standard HPLC graphs of lactic and glycolic acids in the HPLC analysis are shown in Fig. 7 .
Fig. 6 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Schematic representation of the PLGA degradation in vitro or in vivo
Schematic representation of the PLGA degradation in vitro or in vivo
Fig. 7 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Standard HPLC graphs of (1) glycolic and (2) lactic acids
Standard HPLC graphs of (1) glycolic and (2) lactic acids
The concentrations of lactic and glycolic acids with incubation time measured in the current research are presented in Fig. 8 . From the results it is obvious that the concentrations of both the lactic and glycolic acids were small during the first weeks of incubation time. Similarly, it is noticeable that at the second week, only about 0.1 and 0.5 mg of lactic and glycolic acids, respectively, were detected. Then, the lactic and glycolic acids concentrations increased to 0.44 and 1.4 mg at the fifth week, and, finally, to 0.8 and 2.9 mg at the seventh week, respectively.
Fig. 8 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint Concentrations of the degradation products namely lactic (—ο—) and glycolic (—•—) acids from PLGA (50:50) NPs measured using HPLC
Concentrations of the degradation products namely lactic (—ο—) and glycolic (—•—) acids from PLGA (50:50) NPs measured using HPLC
However, lactic acid has greater molecular weight than glycolic acid; it is clear that the concentration of the released glycolic acid was greater than that for the lactic acid. These results confirm the enhanced hydrophilicity (water solubility) of the poly (glycolide) part, which is the main source of glycolic acid from degradation of the PLGA. These findings are in accordance with the enhanced degradability of PLGA (50:50) NPs compared with PLGA (85:15) NPs observed in the current research.
Since the PLGA degradation products (lactic and glycolic acid) are body metabolisable moieties [ 25 , 28 ], would further break down into carbon dioxide and water [ 29 ] then easily and naturally release from the body. This ensures the safety of our PLGA-based formulated NPs as drug delivery carriers since no toxicity is expected because of the accumulation of any foreign substances. The findings of this research correlate with those reported in a previous study, where the PLGA (50:50) delivery system was incubated for 3 weeks and the principal water-soluble acids detected were lactic, lactoylactic and glycolic acids [ 30 ]. Besides these water-soluble acids as the main degradation products, other unknown oligomers were also previously detected as impurities in the PLGA degradation products [ 31 ].
However, although the PLGA copolymer is water-insoluble, it is hydrolytically unstable and can be degraded by attacking its ester bonds, and, consequently, a random chain scission occurs, resulting in lactic and glycolic acids. These degradation products are easily metabolised in the body to water and carbon dioxide via the Krebs cycle [ 29 , 32 ]. These final degradation products can easily be eliminated from the body through the natural pathways, hence safety of the delivery system is guaranteed. Moreover, the complete polymer degradation also ensures release of the entire encapsulated drug from the NPs [ 3 ].
3.2.5 NPs morphology changes
For biodegradable polymers, it is important to investigate the morphological changes over time as the polymer erodes. PLGA is a copolymer consisting of (LA) with crystalline and hydrophobic nature, and (GA) with amorphous and hydrophilic nature. Hydration generally increases hydrolysis and fragmentation of the parent particles. Meanwhile, poly (glycolide) (GA) is the hydrophilic part of the polymer; the higher the amount of this particular part the polymer becomes more hydrophilic and susceptible to hydration. The SEM images revealed an apparent change in NPs surface morphology with incubation time (Fig. 9 ).
Fig. 9 Open in figure viewer PowerPoint SEM images of the polymer degradation as function of incubation time (Magnification at 5000×)
SEM images of the polymer degradation as function of incubation time (Magnification at 5000×)
The deterioration in the smoothness and spherical shape of the NPs is dependent on the rate of polymer degradation. The PLGA (50:50) NPs retained their structure and integrity for up to 30 days before starting to agglomerate at 37 days. The agglomeration became predominant and reached maximum after 50 days. After 60 days of incubation, no clear NPs were found, instead, flakes were observed. The flakes started to degrade after 72 days of incubation, and nearly 70–80%; of the polymers were degraded after 90 days of incubation time. However, the PLGA (85:15) NPs retained their structure even after 37 days of incubation, without any noticeable agglomeration compared with the PLGA (50:50) NPs. Clearly, the PLGA (85:15) NPs only started to agglomerate after 50 days of incubation and most of the NPs remained in the medium even after 60 days. The rate of PLGA (85:15) NPs agglomeration increased after 72 days and some degradation was observed after 92 days.
These results indicate that PLGA (50:50) NPs degrade faster than their counterpart PLGA (85:15) NPs. The amorphous regions are more degradable than the crystalline regions because of the compact structure of the latter, which retards the penetration of the dissolution fluids into the system (NPs) as well as the diffusion of the degradation products from the NPs. Degradation of the amorphous regions is also expected to create some pores and crevices on the NPs, which, consequently, will enhance degradation. Therefore the fast degradation of the PLGA (50:50) NPs could be attributed to their enhanced amorphous and hydrophilic nature, whereas the slow degradation rate observed for the PLGA (85:15) NPs could be attributed to their strong hydrophobic nature because of the high poly(lactide) content, which reduces its wettability and degradation [ 6 , 20 , 24 , 33 - 36 ].
The crystallinity of the polymer may also play a significant role in modulating the degradation rate. Therefore it could be expected that the matrix forming polymer would rapidly undergo the transition, that is, from a glassy state to a rubbery one, upon contact with the phosphate buffer [ 37 ]. Generally, the amorphous polymers do not present a close packed organisation and are more hygroscopic than crystalline polymers [ 3 ]. In addition, co-polymers are normally more amorphous than their homo-polymers and they become increasingly susceptible to hydrolysis as the two monomer contents reach equivalence [ 38 ]. L-PLA is semi-crystalline in nature, whereas D,L-PLA is amorphous because of the irregularities in the chain structure. However, PGA has been reported to be highly crystalline [ 36 , 39 ]. It was found that the compositions that ranged from 25–70% molar ratio of the GA result in the amorphous L-LA/GA copolymers, whereas in the case of DL-LA in the copolymer, the amorphous region extends from 0–70% GA [ 40 ]. More specifically, PLGA has a glass transition temperature ( T g ) of 45°C, which is above the physiological temperature of 37°C; hence, it is normally glassy in nature [ 6 ].
Meanwhile, the semi-crystalline microporous devices permit the release of low molecular weight degradation products. As for the semi-crystalline polyesters, the degradation occurs in the amorphous regions and later in the crystalline ones. It is important to note that crystallinity gradually increases with the degradation process, resulting in a highly crystalline material, which is much more resistant to hydrolysis than the starting polymer [ 28 ]. The increase in crystallinity with the degradation process has been attributed to the increased mobility of the partially degraded polymer chains because of a larger degree of entanglement and their realignment into a more crystalline state. These results indicate that the post-fabrication treatment, such as heat or annealing, as well as shelf-time, may have some effect on the performance of drug-loaded devices [ 28 ].
The findings of this research correlate with those found by Muthu [ 6 ], and Porjazoska et al. [ 40 ], who reported both a higher degradation rate and rapid mass loss of PLGA (50:50) NPs compared with PLGA (85:15) NPs. Mundargi et al. [ 26 ] and Bala et al. [ 41 ] reported a nearly complete degradation of the PLGA (50:50) NPs in 50–60 days. A previous research had reported a complete degradation of the PLGA (85:15) matrix only after 6 months [ 42 ]. PLGA with different molar ratios of (65:35), (75:25) and (80:20) have also previously showed progressively longer in vivo life-times [ 26 ]. Therefore it could be concluded that the PLGA copolymer with different ratios of LA and GA contents exhibit different degradation rates. Therefore PLGA-based delivery systems can be tailored to suit specific applications.
4 Conclusion
As for the PLGA degradation, using water uptake, mass loss, pH change, determination of lactic and glycolic acids and morphology changes techniques, the results revealed a good biodegradability of PLGA, specifically, PLGA (50:50). Generally, the batches of PLGA (50:50) NPs significantly ( ρ < 0.05) differ in their degradation behaviour from the PLGA (85:15) NPs. PLGA (50:50) NPs degrades faster than PLGA (85:15) NPs and they completely degraded in 102 days, whereas, PLGA did not. Therefore it is recommended to use PLGA (50:50) based NPs as drug delivery systems because of their complete degradation, and, consequently, release of both the hosted drug and the degradation products (lactic and glycolic acids) in a limited period of time. The whole PLGA degradation process could be generally explained by the three-phase mechanism. First, random chain scissions with a significant decrease in polymer molecular weight, but without appreciable mass loss or soluble monomer products. Second, a decrease in both the molecular weight and mass exists and soluble oligomeric fragments form. Third, the polymer will completely solubilise producing soluble monomers, namely, lactic and glycolic acids. Based on the high-performance chromatography results, it could be stated that PLGA degrades into body metabolites known as lactic and glycolic acids. These acids are known to be further metabolised inside the human body and into carbon dioxide and water, which can be easily excreted through natural pathways, such as with urine. Thus, the successful development of such biomedical devices, which are biocompatible and biodegradable with short contact duration (several weeks) with the body living cells, is an advantage to be added to their controlled drug delivery. This complete degradation of the polymer and release of the degradation products would undoubtedly eliminate the risk of any toxicity by the degradation of these by-products, since the causes of toxicity of some biomaterials are mostly because of the low-molecular-weight compounds that are leached from the biomaterials into the patient's body.
5 References
Citing Literature
All articles >
Supporting Supporting 0
Mentioning Mentioning 17
Contrasting Contrasting 0
Figures
Figures
References
References
Related
Related
Information
Information
Recommended
Development of nanoformulation of picroliv isolated from Picrorrhiza kurroa Anika Guliani , Avnesh Kumari , Dharmesh Kumar , Sudesh Kumar Yadav , IET Nanobiotechnology
Development of nanoformulation of picroliv isolated from Picrorrhiza kurroa
Fabrication of poly(D, L‐lactic acid) nanoparticles as delivery system for sustained release of L‐theanine Chandrika Ravi , Khan Zaved Ahmed , Mandal Abul Kalam Azad , IET Nanobiotechnology
Fabrication of poly(D, L‐lactic acid) nanoparticles as delivery system for sustained release of L‐theanine
Enhanced efficacy of clindamycin hydrochloride encapsulated in PLA/PLGA based nanoparticle system for oral delivery Pradipta Ranjan Rauta , Niladri Mohan Das , Debasis Nayak , Sarbani Ashe , Bismita Nayak , IET Nanobiotechnology
Enhanced efficacy of clindamycin hydrochloride encapsulated in PLA/PLGA based nanoparticle system for oral delivery
Functionalizing PLGA and PLGA Derivatives for Drug Delivery and Tissue Regeneration Applications Cláudia Martins , Flávia Sousa , Francisca Araújo , Bruno Sarmento , Advanced Healthcare Materials
Functionalizing PLGA and PLGA Derivatives for Drug Delivery and Tissue Regeneration Applications
Nanoencapsulation of Hypericum perforatum and doxorubicin anticancer agents in PLGA nanoparticles through double emulsion technique I. Amjadi , M. Rabiee , M.S. Hosseini , F. Sefidkon , M. Mozafari , Micro & Nano Letters
Nanoencapsulation of Hypericum perforatum and doxorubicin anticancer agents in PLGA nanoparticles through double emulsion technique
About The IET
IET Privacy Statement
Contact IET
Additional links
About Wiley Online Library
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
About Cookies
Manage Cookies
Accessibility
Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
Help & Support
Contact Us
Training and Support
DMCA & Reporting Piracy
Sitemap
Opportunities
Subscription Agents
Advertisers & Corporate Partners
Connect with Wiley
The Wiley Network
Wiley Press Room
Copyright © 1999-2025 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.