Skip to main content
Advertisement
[image]
SpringerOpen is moving to Springer Nature Link. Visit this

journal in its new home.
[image]
Search
•  Get published
•  Explore Journals
•  Books

•  About
•  My account
Search all SpringerOpen articles
Search
Future Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences
•  About
•  Articles
•  Submission Guidelines
•  Submit manuscript
Multifunctional approach with LHRH-mediated PLGA
nanoconjugate for site-specific codelivery of curcumin and BCL2
siRNA in mice lung cancer
Download PDF
Download PDF
•  Research
•  Open access
•  Published: 20 November 2024
Multifunctional approach with
LHRH-mediated PLGA
nanoconjugate for site-specific
codelivery of curcumin and
BCL2 siRNA in mice lung
cancer
•  Madhuchandra Lahan1,2,
•  Trideep Saikia1,2,
•  Kalpajit Dutta3,
•  Rinku Baishya4,

•  Alakesh Bharali1,2,
•  Sunayana Baruah5,
•  Rituraj Bharadwaj3,
•  Subhash Medhi3 &
•  …
•  Bhanu P. Sahu
  ORCID:
orcid.org/0000-0002-8036-64961,2 
Show authors
Future Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences volume 10,
Article number: 163 (2024) Cite this article
•  1165 Accesses
•  3 Citations
•  Metrics details
Abstract
Background
Lung cancer remains a leading cancer type, but current
chemotherapy is limited by issues including poor drug delivery,
toxicity, and resistance. To address these challenges, we developed
a novel PLGA-PEG-LHRH (PPL) nanoconjugate system for improved
drug delivery. Curcumin, known for its anticancer and P-gp
inhibition properties, was co-loaded with bcl2siRNA (bclsR) to
inhibit the bcl2 protein, thus overcoming both resistance
mechanisms.
Results
The PPL conjugate was successfully synthesized and characterized
using FTIR, 1H NMR, XRD, XPS and BCA assay. Curcumin and
bclsR-loaded PLGA nanoemulsions were prepared by double
emulsion solvent evaporation method and characterized. The
optimized nanoconjugate had size of 179 ± 16 nm, favorable zeta
potential, high drug entrapment, and was confirmed via TEM.

Controlled release studies indicated 83% drug release within 24 h.
In vitro studies revealed significant cytotoxicity against A549 lung
cancer cells, with the nanoconjugate showing IC50 of 8.24 µg/mL
compared to 21.26 µg/mL for plain curcumin. Enhanced cellular
uptake and effective targeting of A549 cells were observed.
Molecular analyses demonstrated significant downregulation of
MDR1 and Bcl2 RNA and protein expression, highlighting the
nanoconjugates' ability to suppress resistance mechanisms.
Pharmacokinetic studies in Wistar rats showed superior plasma
drug concentrations, half-life, and AUC for the nanoconjugate
versus pure drug suspension. Biodistribution studies showed
increased drug accumulation in the lungs. In vivo efficacy studies in
Balb/c mice demonstrated higher tumor inhibition ratios for CUR-
siRNA PPL NPs (66.89%) and CUR-PPL NPs (59.84%) which was
further confirmed with TNFα and p53 levels in blood.
Histopathological studies showed good healing in the CUR-siRNA
PPL NP- and CUR-PPL NP-treated mice compared to suspension.
Conclusion
From the study, it may be concluded that the PPL nanoconjugate
system, loaded with curcumin and bcsR, can be potentially
effective, multifunctional targeted approach for lung cancer
therapy.
Graphical Abstract
[image]
Background
Lung cancer is the most frequent subtype of cancer, causing death
in both men and women. It is predicted that by 2035, 3 million
cases of lung cancer will be prevalent globally [1, 2]. The World
Health Organization (WHO) reports that lung cancer is greatly
increasing the disease burden worldwide with 1,350,000 new
instances (12.4% of all new cancer cases) resulting in 17.6% of all
cancer-related deaths in 2020 [3]. Tobacco use, occupational
asbestos exposure, cannabis or marijuana use, radon exposure, air

pollution, exposure to the group 1 carcinogen arsenic, inflammation
and cellular damage during respiratory infections, inflammation
and scarring associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
and a family history of lung cancer are the common etiological
factors for the development of lung cancer [4]. According to
histology, there are two types of lung cancer: small cell lung cancer
(SCLC, 13%) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC, 85%).
Additionally, NSCLC is further classified as big cell carcinoma (5–
10%), squamous cell carcinoma (25–30%), and lung
adenocarcinoma (40%) [4]. Treatment for lung cancer involves
the combined use of radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and/or
surgery depending on the stage and condition. Most lung
malignancies are identified at advanced stages, with local tumor
invasion or distant metastases, and are thus not amenable to
surgery because of the lack of early-stage diagnostics, resulting in
poor 5 year survival rate. Therefore, the only options for treating
lung cancer currently are chemotherapy and radiation therapy [5,
6]. However, chemotherapy encounters several difficulties, such as
poor bioavailability of the drug, systemic cytotoxicity, rapid
elimination, non-specific drug distribution, and the emergence of
drug resistance which is a major concern [1, 7]. The major causes
of resistance to drugs are pump and non-pump resistance. The
pump resistance is caused by the action of proteins termed ABC
transporters, such as P-Glycoprotein (p-gp), which are responsible
for drug efflux and therefore lowering intracellular concentration of
the drug [8, 9]. There are reports on the suppression of this pump
resistance with p-gp inhibitors. However, despite the suppression of
drug efflux pumps, cells can still survive because of activated non-
pump resistance. Activation of cell apoptosis mostly via Bcl-2
protein is the primary mechanism of non-pump resistance [10].
Formulations based on short-interfering RNA (siRNA) have
the potential to treat a variety of genetic targets by silencing them
effectively and specifically [8, 11]. The majority of anticancer
medications concurrently activate the cellular pump and non-pump
defense, preventing cell death. Therefore, it is important to
concurrently block both pump-dependent and non-pump
mechanisms of resistance in cells to successfully reduce the overall
resistance to chemotherapy [8]. The current strategy for addressing
issues related to drug resistance is focused on combination
treatment targeting both the resistance-causing mechanisms. The

methods primarily seek to deliver an anticancer drug along with
potential p-gp inhibition and a BCL-2 expression down-regulator.
Curcumin, a natural polyphenol produced from the rhizome of
Curcuma longa (turmeric), is a potential anticancer drug [12]
because of its capacity to trigger cancer cells to undergo apoptosis
without having harmful effects on healthy cells [13, 14].
Curcumin's potential to inhibit nuclear factor-kappa B (NF kappa B),
which controls apoptosis, cell proliferation, and inflammation in
healthy cells, is the primary cause of its anticancer properties
[15,16,17]. According to recent studies, curcumin also has a
potential inhibitory effect on the overexpressed p-gp of tumor cells
[13, 15, 18]. However, despite its promising properties, its clinical
use has been constrained because of its poor water solubility
(0.125 mg/L), poor bioavailability, severe metabolism, degradation,
and quick excretion [15,16,17,18,19]. To circumvent these
restrictions, numerous techniques have been utilized with Nano
Drug Delivery Systems, such as liposomes, inorganic carriers,
protein-based nanocarriers, and polymeric nanoparticles for
improved local retention and safer systemic delivery [14, 16].
Polymeric nanoparticles (PNPs) are sub-micron carriers consisting
of an oily core encapsulated within a polymeric-based shell, with
surfactants present at the interface [20]. Due to the existence of a
polymeric wall, PNPs have a high drug-loading capacity, are
physicochemically stable, and are resistant to enzymatic
destruction. Additionally, PNPs may improve the pharmacokinetic
profile of hydrophobic medicines and reduce their toxicity [21, 22].
PNPs can easily deliver curcumin and offer longer circulation,
greater permeability, and resistance to metabolic processes [14].
Among the different polymers utilized in the cancer drug-based
formulation, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognized
the poly (DL-lactide co-glycolide acid) (PLGA)-based
nanoparticulate system as the most effective delivery method owing
to its relatively low toxicity, biocompatibility, biodegradability,
non-immunogenicity, and sustained release capabilities [23, 24].
Moreover, PLGA is widely used to transport proteins, peptides,
small-molecular-weight substances, and nucleic acids such as small
interfering RNA (siRNA) [25, 26]. One major limitation of curcumin
is its short circulation time, moreover, nanoparticles also suffer

similar problems due to RES (reticuloendothelial system) uptake
[23, 27]. Hence, the stealth coating of the nanovesicle is essential to
have prolonged circulation times. The PEGylation of PLGA NP can
be used to prevent the opsonin binding, extend the nanoparticles'
duration of circulation, and reduce RES uptake [23, 28, 29].
To minimize the overall toxicity of chemotherapeutic treatments to
healthy cells and to increase the tumor accumulation of anticancer
therapies, active targeting is considered one of the advanced
strategies [30, 31]. This limits the drug's proximity to non-target
organs, reducing the risk of systemic toxicity and subsequent
harmful side effects. Targeting the receptor with a high-affinity
targeting ligand will selectively recognize the overexpressed
receptors on the cancer cell surfaces, and could enhance the
therapeutic result of cancer treatment [32]. To achieve active
targeting in lung cancer drug delivery, luteinizing-hormone
releasing hormone (LHRH) peptide which is specific to extracellular
overexpressed receptors in lung cancer cells can be targeted [23,
30, 33]. In healthy lung cells, LHRH expression is quite low, but it
is increased in the malignant condition [33]. LHRH peptides are
extensively investigated for their targeting capabilities and delivery
of anticancer drugs to LHRHR-overexpressing sites. Shitole et al.
(2020) formulated PPL nanocapsules encapsulating both docetaxel
and quercetin, demonstrating their efficacy against prostate cancer
[7]. Similarly, Cao et al. (2016) formulated PPL polymer micelles
encapsulating docetaxel, reporting improved anticancer activity
against prostate cancer due to LHRH targeting [23]. In a separate
study, Li et al. (2014) developed LHRH-targeted polysaccharide
nanoparticles for cisplatin delivery in breast cancer, achieving
higher cellular internalization in MCF-7 cells and improved tumor
accumulation and suppression compared to non-targeted
nanoparticles [30]. Hence the nanoparticles can be specifically
targeted to tumor cells by conjugating with ligands, siRNAs, or
antibodies [9].
Despite all the developments in the use of nanoformulations for
better therapy of lung cancer, its successful translation to clinical
application is still lacking. Heterogenicity of tumors, insufficient
delivery, toxicity, and resistance are some of the major issues to be
addressed. The design of multifunctional nanoformulations with a

more combined approach is therefore necessary for better delivery
against these cells. Hence, in the present study, a multifunctional
approach has been designed for better site-specific delivery to lung
cancer cells by employing curcumin as a powerful anticancer drug
and a possible p-gp inhibitor downregulating the efflux pumps, and
siRNA targeting the BCL2 mRNA to downregulate its apoptosis
inhibition pathway. A more site-specific delivery method utilizing
PPL nanoconjugates with better circulation time due to PEGylation
was developed to target the lung cancer cells to enhance efficacy
against lung cancer cells. This might result in increased cell
uptake by cancer cells, enhancing the effectiveness of anticancer
medications and decreasing the related systemic toxicity. Many
efforts have been made to reduce drug resistance focusing on
downregulating any one mechanism. However, very limited
attempts have been made till now to inhibit both pump and non-
pump mechanisms simultaneously along with an active targeting
mechanism. This study proposes using curcumin as a potential P-gp
inhibitor to downregulate efflux pump-mediated resistance and
bclsR to downregulate bcl2 mRNA-regulated non-pump resistance
along with active targeting of cancer cells by using LHRH ligand.
Hence, the development of a multifunctional nanoconjugate with
more site-specific delivery along with down regulators of both
mechanisms shall be an innovative approach for designing therapy
addressing both problems of systemic toxicity and drug resistance
involved in chemotherapy of lung Cancer.
Methods
Materials
PLGA (Expansorb® DLG 50-2A, 50:50, Mw 5–20 kDa) (PLGA) was
purchased from Merck (USA). Curcumin was purchased from SRL
(India). Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA), [D-Lys6]-LHRH, NH2-PEG-COOH,
and poly-L-lysine (PLL) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (India).
N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-
carbodiimide (EDC) were obtained from Abcam. 4-dimethyl
aminopyridine (DMAP), N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA),
methanol, and ethanol were obtained from SRL. Anhydrous
methylene chloride, anhydrous chloroform, acetone, diethyl ether,

dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), acetonitrile HPLC grade, water HPLC
grade, and Tween 80 were obtained from Merck (Mumbai, India).
The BCA Protein Assay Kit was purchased from Abcam (US).
Dialysis membrane, Thiazolyl Blue Tetrazolium Bromide (MTT),
F12K media, phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), Penicillin–
Streptomycin antibiotic solution, and Trypsin/EDTA (TE) were
purchased from HiMedia (India). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was
procured from GibcoInc (USA), Bcl-2 siRNA and antibodies specific
for BCL2 and p-gp were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology
(USA), Total RNA purification Mini Kit was purchased from
Favorgen Biotech corp., Verso cDNA Synthesis Kit was obtained
from Thermo Fisher Scientific, standardized DNA primers were
purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (USA). All of the
other reagents and substances utilized in the investigation were of
analytical grade.
A549 human lung cancer cell lines were obtained from the National
Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, India. Balb/c mice were
obtained from Vivo Biotech, Hyderabad, and Wistar rats were
obtained from the animal house of the University.
Synthesis of conjugates
Synthesis of PLGA-PEG-COOH (PPCH) conjugation
PPCH was synthesized following the method by Shitole et al. [7]
and Dao et al. [14] with modifications. Briefly, 2.5 g of acid-
terminated PLGA was solubilized in anhydrous methylene chloride,
and to it, 95 mg NHS and 129 mg EDC were added. It was stirred
overnight at normal room temperature under nitrogen to activate
the carboxylic group present in acid-terminated PLGA. PLGA-NHS
was precipitated in diethyl ether (cold), filtered, and washed to
remove unreacted EDC and NHS, and then dried under vacuum.
PLGA-NHS (2 g) was added to NH2-PEG-COOH (500 mg) and
DIPEA (85 mg) after redissolving in anhydrous chloroform. After
stirring for 24 h under nitrogen, the mixture was precipitated with
diethyl ether (ice-cold), filtered, washed, and dried by
lyophilization (Coolsafe 110–4, LABOGENE, Germany) to obtain
PPCH [23].

PPL conjugation
The LHRH ligand was conjugated with the PLGA-PEG copolymer by
dissolving 100 mg of prepared PPCH and 10 mg of activated LHRH-
NH2 in anhydrous methylene chloride solution and stirred for 1 h
under nitrogen at room temperature. Three milligrams of EDC and
1 mg of DMAP were added to the dispersion, which was then stirred
at room temperature under nitrogen for for48 h. The product was
subsequently obtained by precipitating in ice-cold diethyl ether;
filtered, purified with dialysis, lyophilized (Coolsafe 110–4,
LABOGENE, Germany), and stored at − 20 °C [7, 23].
Evaluation of Conjugates
The formation of PPL conjugate was confirmed by Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), and bicinchoninic acid (BCA) studies.
FTIR analysis
The FTIR spectra of the conjugated and unconjugated PLGA were
compared to check for structural change due to conjugation by
scanning from 400 cm−1 to 4000 cm−1 in FTIR spectrometer
(PerkinElmer Model: L1600400 Spectrum Two Ft-IR/DTGS).
NMR study
The conjugation of PLGA-PEG and PPL was confirmed by the proton
NMR spectrum (ECX400 -Jeol 400 MHz, Japan). The standard 1H
NMR spectra were analyzed to verify the conjugation at 400 MHz
by using DMSO as solvent.
XPS study
XPS is one of the most promising instruments for
identifying chemical entities on a surface. The conjugation of
(DLys6) LHRH to nanoparticles was confirmed based upon the
presence of nitrogen peak in XPS. Nitrogen is a constituent of the
various bonds (peptide and amide) formed between the NPs and

peptides through NHS activation. The samples were dispersed in
water, processed, and analyzed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific X-
ray photoelectron spectrometer (Escalab Xi +) equipped with a
monochromatic AI k alpha source. 50 eV pass energy was employed
for the analysis with a 200 eV survey.
BCA Protein Assay
The quantity of LHRH peptide in PPL conjugation was quantified
utilizing the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Abcam), following the
manufacturer's protocol. This kit offers a rapid method for protein
concentration determination. It employs a copper salt, reducible by
protein(s), forming a colored complex with bicinchoninic acid, with
a strong absorbance at 562 nm. The complex intensity correlates
with protein amount.
Formulation of curcumin- and siRNA-loaded PPL
nanoconjugate system
The curcumin- and siRNA-loaded PPL nanoparticle (CUR-SiRNA-
PPL NP) was formulated using the method of double emulsion
solvent evaporation (w1/o/w2) [24]. Briefly, 20 mg of PPL and
10 mg of curcumin were dissolved completely in a mixture of
acetone and methanol (3 mL, 7:3 v/v) to form the organic phase.
Fifty micrograms of bclsR was mixed with 50 μg of poly-L-lysine
(PLL) in 200μL of nuclease-free water, and the resulting solution
was added gradually to the organic solution. The mixture was then
sonicated (Labman Scientific Instruments) at 4 °C for 15 min to
produce w1/o primary emulsion. This primary emulsion was then
added gradually to deionized water containing Polyvinyl Alcohol
(PVA) and tween 80 solutions, with continuous stirring, and
sonicated at 4 °C for 15 min to form w1/o/w2 double emulsion.
This emulsion was then stirred in room condition until the organic
solvent was completely evaporated. Then, the CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs
were obtained by centrifuging at 15,000 rpm for 50 min at 4 °C and
freeze-dried.
Particle size characterization

Particle size and polydispersity index (PDI) were analyzed by
dynamic light scattering using a particle size analyzer (Zetasizer,
Malvern Nano S 90). Determination was carried out at 25 °C at a
fixed angle of 90°. Before the measurement, the NC suspension was
adequately diluted at 1:9 ratios. This dilution was then vortexed
and the size and PDI. The zeta potential of the PLGA nanoconjugate
was evaluated by electrophoretic mobility technique using a
Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS500. TEM studies for particle size
characterization and morphology were performed using TEM JEOL
JEM 2100 (200 kV). Prepared NP was added onto a carbon-coated
copper grid (400-mesh) which was stained with 2% (w/v)
phosphotungstic acid solution for 20 min. Approximately 15 min
after depositing the nanoparticles, the grid was gently tapped with
filter paper to remove excess water and then air-dried and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs were acquired
at a magnification of 200,000 × [34].
HPLC Method development
Concentrations of CUR for release studies and entrapment efficiency
were calculated using a Waters HPLC system (Milford, MA,
Massachusetts, USA) equipped with a dual pump (Waters 515) and
a UV detector (Waters 2489). The solvent system comprised
acetonitrile/water (HPLC grade), and a Nova-Pak® HR C18 column
(3.9 × 300 mm, 6 µm particle size) maintained at 25.0 ± 0.5 °C was
utilized. Empower chromatography software facilitated data
acquisition, analysis, and reporting.
Evaluation of various acetonitrile/water ratios (with 2% acetic acid)
including 80:20, 70:30, 60:40, 75:25, and 85:15 v/v was conducted
to determine the optimal solvent system. The selection was based
on peak sharpness, height, and width. An isocratic method was
developed using a solvent system of acetonitrile/water (2% acetic
acid) (85:15 v/v) at different flow rates (0.5, 1, and 1.5 mL/min),
and optimization was based on peak characteristics. Accuracy was
determined by analyzing six separate reference drug solutions
(100 µg/mL) with the appropriate mobile phase. Precision testing
involved assaying standard drug solutions at concentrations of 25,
50, 75, and 100 µg/mL. Furthermore, linearity assessment was done
by preparing a calibration curve using serial dilutions ranging from

3–200 µg/mL. All the above tests for accuracy, precision, and
linearity were conducted using acetonitrile/water (2% acetic acid)
(85:15 v/v) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min and detection at 425 nm
wavelength. A calibration curve for CUR was established by plotting
the peak area against concentrations with the determination of R2
value [35, 36].
Drug Entrapment Efficiency (DEE)
The DEE (%) of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP was calculated by measuring
the concentration of free drug using the following procedure. Two
milliliters of prepared CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP solution in PBS was cold-
centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 30 min to separate the free drug from
the NPs. One milliliter of the clear supernatant was collected, and
the free drug concentration was measured using HPLC (Waters).
DEE % was calculated using the following equation [21]:
$${\text{EE}}\left( \% \right) = \left[ {\left( {\left(
{{\text{Total}}\;{\text{drug}}\;{\text{loaded}}{-}{\text{free}}\;
{\text{drug}}\;{\text{present}}} \right)/{\text{Total}}\;
{\text{drug}}\;{\text{loaded}}} \right) { \times }{1}00} \right]$$
Entrapment efficiency of siRNA
To calculate siRNA encapsulation efficiency, CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs
were solubilized in PBS buffer and further centrifuged for 50 min at
4 °C at 15,000 × g. The supernatant was analyzed for siRNA
concentration using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, US) to determine unencapsulated siRNA. The
encapsulated siRNA amount was then determined by subtracting
the unencapsulated siRNA from the total loaded siRNA [24]. The
siRNA encapsulation was assessed using the following equations.
Encapsulation Efficiency (%) = (Amount of encapsulated siRNA/
Amount of Total siRNA Loaded) × 100% [37]
In vitro drug release study
In vitro drug release from prepared CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP was
performed using a cellulose dialysis membrane. Phosphate buffer

(pH 7.4) containing 1% Tween 80 was used as a medium for the
release study. One milliliter of the prepared formulation was taken
into a dialysis bag (molecular weight cut off between 12,000 and
14,000 K) and dialyzed against a 100 mL release medium. The
solution was continuously agitated magnetically at 100 rpm at 37 
± 1 °C using an IKA HS7 magnetic stirrer. Two milliliters of the
sample was withdrawn from the receptor cell at definite time
intervals (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 24 h) and at each time, and the
medium was compensated with an equal volume of fresh
dissolution medium. The quantity of drug in the sampled solution
was quantified using the developed HPLC method. For determining
curcumin concentration in the solution, a calibration curve was
prepared for curcumin (R2 = 0.97 over the concentration range
between 3 and 200 μg/mL) by employing a pure drug solution
dissolved in HPLC grade methanol, and the graph was plotted with
drug release (%) against time (h) [38, 39].
In vitro Cytotoxicity studies
The human lung cancer A594 cell line was incubated in an F12K
medium containing 10% FBS, 100 mg/mL streptomycin, and 100
U/ mL penicillin. This was followed by culturing the cells in a 5%
CO2 atmosphere with 95% air and 95% humidity at 37 °C. Cell
viability was assessed by the MTT assay. One hundred microliters
(1.8 × 106 cells/well) of cells was pipetted out and seeded into 96-
well plates in all the wells except those wells marked as blank and
then incubated for 12 h to make the cells adhere to the surface of
the wells. Then, treatment concentrations were added in triplicate
for all the concentrations except controlled and blank. In the
controlled wells, only media was taken and incubated on the plate
for 24, 48, and 72 h. The treatment groups contained CUR
suspension, CUR-PLGA NPs, and CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP. The cultures
were treated with MTT solution and additionally incubated for 4 h
at 37 °C. The supernatants were discarded, and the formazan
crystals were dissolved by adding 200 μL of DMSO to each well.
The 96-well plates were then read using a microplate reader
(Synergy H1) to measure absorbance at 570 nm, with background
correction at 655 nm [40].
The following equation was used to calculate the % cell viability

[21]:
$$\left[ {\left( {{\text{Abs57}}0\;{\text{of}}\;{\text{treated}}\;
{\text{cells}}/{\text{Abs57}}0\;{\text{of}}\;{\text{untreated}}\;
{\text{cells}}} \right){\text{x1}}00} \right].$$
Percentage cell viability and IC50 were calculated.
In vitro cell uptake study
In vitro cellular uptake of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs and CUR-PLGA NPs
formulations was determined by fluorescent microscope (XD-RFL
Fluorescence Microscope, SDPTOP, China) using A549 human lung
cancer cells. Briefly, 200,000 cells/mL cells were seeded in a 12-
well plate following incubation in a CO2 incubator at 37 °C for
24 h. The medium was then aspirated and washed with 1 mL of 1X
PBS. In 1 mL of culture medium required concentration of the
formulations was then treated and incubated for 2, 4, and 6 h.
Following treatment, the cells were washed twice with 1X PBS and
then mounted with 500µLof mounting medium before imaging
[40]. The cells were then observed with a 20X objective on a
fluorescence microscope, equipped with an emission filter of
525/50 nm and an excitation filter of 470/40 nm. ImageJ Software
v1.48 was used to analyze the images.
Determination of the extent of suppression of targeted
gene
The extent of suppression of targeted Bcl-2 mRNA and mdr1 was
done by qRT-PCR method as given by Taratula et al. [10]; Taratula
et al. [41]. Briefly, A549 cancer cells with 70% confluency were
transfected with CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs and incubated for 24 h. RNA
from cells was isolated by utilizing Total RNA purification Mini Kit
(Favorgen) and its cDNA was synthesized using Verso cDNA
Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cDNA product was
then added to reaction mixtures that contained SYBR Green
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and standardized DNA primers
[24]. Then the solution was amplified using a Rotorgene Q (Qiagen)
5plex real-time PCR machine. β-actin expression was selected as a

housekeeping gene. The following standard primers were used for
the study: Bcl2, forward (F) AGCTTTGAACAGAATACTTTTGTGG
and reverse (R) CGACTGAAGAGTGAGCCCAG; and P-gp forward (F)
GCCGCTTCATTTTCGACTGC and reverse (R)
CTAGAGTGGAGACTCCGGTGA. Following were the PCR conditions:
denaturation initially at 95˚C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of
denaturation for 30 s at same temperature and annealing for 30 s at
60˚C.
Protein expression/western blot studies
Protein expression levels of P-gp and Bcl2 in cancer cells were
assessed via western blot analysis. A549 cells 80% confluent, were
treated with a solution of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs. After treatment,
cells were lysed at 4 °C in RIPA lysis buffer (ELAB SCIENCE)
supplemented with protease inhibitors. Cell lysates were obtained
via centrifugation. From the supernatant of centrifuged cell lysates
protein samples were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels and placed
onto PVDF membranes. The membranes were then probed with
primary antibodies against P-gp or Bcl2, followed by HRP-
conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Abcam) for blot development.
Expression levels of Bcl2 and P-gp were compared relative to β-
actin, a housekeeping protein. Western blot images were analyzed
using EZ-Capture MG (Japan) and Image J software[9, 24].
Pharmacokinetic study
The pharmacokinetics study was performed by using Albino Wistar
rats, 8–10 weeks old having 150–200 gm body weight. The study
was conducted in accordance with the CPCSEA guidelines, after
obtaining approval from the Institutional Animal Ethical Committee
(IAEC) (Ref no: GIPS/IAEC/PhD/PRO/01/2023). Animals were
provided a standard diet and water ad libitum and maintained in a
12:12 h light–dark cycle with constant ambient conditions. All rats
were fasted overnight before the experiment but had free access to
water. A total of 18 rats either male or female were taken and
divided into 3 groups (6 in each group). The groups I received CUR-
SiRNA-PPL NP, group II received CUR-PLGA NPs and group III
received curcumin suspension. The above-mentioned treatments
were administered intravenously through the tail vein in a dose

equivalent to 50 mg/kg body weight to different groups of animals.
Then 0.5 mL of blood was collected from each animal at
predetermined time intervals (0.5 h, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 6 h, 10 h, and
24 h) by retro-orbital puncture and transferred to the K2 EDTA vials
with immediate vortexing. Blood samples were centrifuged at
5000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant (200μL) was
collected as plasma samples and preserved at −800 C. Then 1.2 mL
of a mixture of ethyl acetate and methanol (9:1) was added to
plasma as extracting solvent, vortexed for 5 min, and centrifuged at
8000 RPM for 20 min at 4 °C. From the supernatant, 1 mL of the
organic layer was collected, and evaporated, and the residues were
reconstituted in acetonitrile [42, 43]. Then the CUR concentration
was determined by HPLC (Arc Waters RPHPLC) using mobile phase
acetonitrile/water (2% acetic acid) (85:15 v/v) at a flow rate of
0.5 mL/min and at a wavelength of 425 nm.
In vivo anticancer study and biodistribution study
Animal study design
For performing in vivo anticancer study and biodistribution study,
Benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P] induced lung cancer model was followed
using Balb/c mice. B(a)P, a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
present in tobacco, is a crucial agent for lung cancer pathogenesis
[44]. For inducing lung cancer, adult Balb/c mice (20–25 g) of
either sex were used. The protocol was approved by the IAEC of the
University (GCU/IAEC/SPON/PRO/4/2023), ensuring all
experimental procedures were performed in strict accordance with
CPCSEA and Animal Ethical Committee guidelines. Mice were
housed in Individually Ventilated Caging (IVC) (Orchid Mumbai),
provided with a standard diet and free access to water, and
maintained with a 12:12 h light–dark cycle at 25 °C.
In vivo anticancer study
For the in vivo anticancer study, 36 Balb/c mice were taken, and
they were divided into six groups. Mice of Group-1 (Positive
Control) were kept in the normal laboratory without any cancer
induction. Other mice were treated with B(a)P dissolved in corn oil

at a dose of 50 mg/kg body weight orally, twice a week, for
16 weeks to induce lung cancer [44,45,46]. Mice were divided into
different groups; Group 2 (treatment with saline), Group 3
(treatment with PPL Blank NPs) (PPL blank NP), Group 4
(treatment with PPL NPs with curcumin) (CUR-PPL NP), Group 5
(treatment with CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs) and Group 6 (treatment with
CUR suspension). After 16 weeks, the groups were treated with
the required dose (dosing volume 100 µl) by intravenous (IV)
administration through tail-vein for 12 days (every 3rd day, leading
to a total of 5 dosing/mice). On the 13th day after treatment, the
mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation, and lungs were
collected and observed for the growth of the tumor. The tumor size
was assessed by measuring two perpendicular dimensions using
Vernier calipers. Tumor volume was determined using the formula:
$${\text{V}} = \left( {{\text{W}}^{{2}} \times {\text{L}}}
\right)/{2},$$
where “L” is the tumor length at the longest point, and “W” at
the widest point [47].
The tumor inhibition ratio (TIR %) was calculated using the
formula:
$${\text{TIR}}\left( \% \right) = \left( {{\text{Wc}} -
{\text{Wt}}} \right)/{\text{Wc}} \times {1}00\% .$$
where Wc and Wt are the mean weight of the tumor of the saline
group and treatment group respectively [47].
In vivo biodistribution study
The in vivo biodistribution study was performed on 18 B(a)P
induced balb/c mice by inducing lung cancer as described by Velli
et al. [45]; Kasala et al. [46]; Magesh et al. [44] for up to 16 weeks.
After 16 weeks, the mice were divided into 3 groups, and the
treatments (SiRNA-CUR-PPL NP, CUR-PPL NP, and CUR-Susp) were
given to the three groups with the required dose (dosing volume
100 µl) respectively, by intravenous (IV) administration through
tail-vein. The mice were then euthanized by cervical dislocation,
and the major organs like the heart, liver, spleen, kidney, and lung

were excised, washed, and weighed. The separated organs were
then homogenized (IKA T25 digital Ultra-Turrax) with PBS,
centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was
collected. Acetonitrile was added to the resulting solution for
deproteinization. Ethyl acetate (1.2 mL) and methanol (9:1) mixture
was added to the solution, vortexed for 5 min, and centrifuged at
8000 RPM for 20 min at 4 °C. From that, 1 mL organic layer was
collected, evaporated, and reconstituted in acetonitrile [42, 43].
CUR concentration was determined by HPLC using acetonitrile (2%
acetic acid) (85:15 v/v) at 0.5 mL/min and 425 nm wavelength.
TNF-α and p53 marker estimation
Plasma from each mouse group was collected for analysis. TNF-
alpha and p53 levels were determined using an ELISA kit
(Elabscience) and FineTest TP53 ELISA kit, respectively, using the
standard protocol and absorbance was read at 450 nm.
Histopathology study
A histopathological study was conducted by collecting the lung
tissues from all the animals. Specimens of lung tissues were fixed in
10% formalin solution at room temperature. Subsequently, tissues
were dehydrated in graded alcohol series, clearing in xylene,
embedding in paraffin to make blocks of 4–5 microns. Paraffin-
embedded tissue blocks were sectioned into a thickness of 4 mm
using a rotary microtome. After deparaffinizing the samples, they
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), and examined
under a light microscope [46].
Result
Preparation of PPL conjugates
The PPCH copolymer was synthesized from the activated acid-
terminated PLGA and then reacted with heterofunctional PEG and
NH2-PEG-COOH as per the procedure discussed in the
methodology. The structure of the copolymer PPCH was confirmed
using FTIR and 1H NMR. The targeting ligand (LHRH) was then

conjugated with this synthesized di-block polymer PPCH by
carbodiimide chemistry to form PPL using DMAP as a catalyst.
Confirmation of PPL conjugates
The confirmation of the formation of PPL nanoconjugate was
performed by FTIR, 1H NMR, XPS, and BCA analyses of the free
polymer and the conjugates.
FTIR analysis
FTIR analysis was used to confirm the conjugation of LHRH to
PPCH. The FTIR spectra for acid-terminated PLGA displayed (Fig. 1
A) characteristic peaks at 1743 cm−1,1161 cm−1 and 1080 cm−1.
In addition to the peaks for PLGA, the spectra of the PPCH
conjugate (Fig. 1 A) exhibited additional peaks at 2945 cm−1,
1566 cm−1, 1359 cm−1, 1277 cm−1 and 961 cm−1. The FTIR
spectra for PPL (Fig. 1 A) revealed additional peaks, in addition to
those observed for PPCH, at 3302.82 cm−1, 1560 cm−1, and an
increased intensity at 1650 cm−1.
Fig. 1
[image]
Confirmation of conjugates; A FTIR spectra of PLGA-COOH, PLGA-
PEG-COOH and PLGA-PEG-LHRH, B and C 1H NMR spectra of
PLGA-COOH and PLGA-PEG-LHRH, D XPS Spectra of PLGA-PEG-
LHRH
Full size image
1H NMR study
The standard 1H NMR spectra were analyzed for acid-terminated
PLGA and the peaks obtained (Fig. 1 B) at 1.47 ppm, 4.8 ppm, and
5.2 ppm. At 3.5 ppm an additional peak (Fig. 1 C) was observed in
the case of PPL, in addition to a small peak at 7.0 ppm, 2.49 to
2.5 ppm, 4.9 and 5.2 ppm. Thus, the finding confirms the synthesis
of PPL.

XPS study
The conjugation of LHRH to PPCH was further verified based on the
presence of a nitrogen peak in XPS corresponding to amide
formation with the peptide. Nitrogen peak was originally absent in
PLGA-curcumin nanoparticle. The result is shown in Fig. 1 D.
BCA protein assay
The amount of LHRH in the PPL was further assessed
spectrophotometrically using the BCA protein assay kit (Abcam)
(LHRH being a peptide). At 562 nm, the study reported
the presence of 61 ± 5.12 μmol LHRH/g in the PPL conjugate.
Formulation of drug- and siRNA-loaded nanoparticles
The curcumin and bclsR were loaded in the PLGA nanoformulation
by the double emulsion (w1/o/w2) solvent evaporation followed by
the ultra-sonication method as mentioned in the methodology.
Based on data on particle size, size distribution analysis, and drug
entrapment efficiency, the obtained PLGA NPs were optimized by
using different variables like sonication time, different stabilizers,
and concentration of stabilizer, etc., as shown in Table 1. In this
study, curcumin being the hydrophobic drug was directly added to
the organic phase containing the PPL conjugate. It was then
emulsified with the aqueous phase containing siRNA along with PLL
in nuclease-free water. The resulting primary emulsion is then
added in a larger aqueous phase containing the stabilizers and
stirred for the formation of more homogenous nanoformulation
followed by evaporation at room temperature for the removal of the
organic solvents [48].
Table 1 Formulation table for optimized curcumin-SiRNA-
PLGA-LHRH Nanoparticle (CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs) (mean ± SD, n 
= 3)
Full size table
Particle size and polydispersity index analysis

The size, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential are
important properties that affect the stability and performance of
NPs. Particle size and PDI were determined by dynamic light
scattering technique using Malvern Zeta sizer. The mean particle
size of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs was obtained in the size range of 179.5 
± 16 nm and polydispersity of 0.155 ± 0.14 (Fig. 2 A). The zeta
potential results indicated that the prepared CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs
exhibited good stability, with zeta potential values ranging from
−17.0 to −17.4 mV (Fig. 2 B). Particle size and morphology were
studied by incorporating TEM analysis. From the TEM images,
the homogeneous and spherical size of the formulation was
observed with uniform dispersion and no particle aggregation. The
size of the particle was found similar to the Zetasizer results. The
evidence of surface conjugation in the NPs was also observed from
the TEM image as shown in Fig. 2 C.
Fig. 2
[image]
Characterization of CUR-SiRNA-PPL nanoparticles. A Particle size
and size distribution, B zeta potential, C TEM image showing
surface conjugation, D in vitro drug release of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs
in PBS (pH 7.4)
Full size image
HPLC Method development
The HPLC method was optimized by adjusting the mobile phase
ratio of acetonitrile/water (2% acetic acid), flow rate, and run time.
Based on the research, the ideal mobile phase ratio was determined
to be 85:15 v/v of acetonitrile to water (2% acetic acid), with a
flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. A calibration curve with linearity R2 = 
0.9913 and y = 35744x + 353,956 was produced at different
dilutions ranging from 3 μg/mL to 200 μg/mL.
Entrapment efficiency
The prepared CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs showed curcumin entrapment
efficiency (% DEE) as 85.7 ± 2.4%. The siRNA encapsulation

efficiency was found to be 97.16 ± 1.32%.
In vitro drug release study
The in vitro release profile of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs formulation is
shown in Fig. 2 D. The cumulative percentage release of curcumin
was investigated in phosphate buffer pH 7.4 containing tween 80
(1%), for 24 h using a dialysis bag technique. From the release
study, the cumulative percent drug release was observed
approximately 83 ± 2% in 24 h.
In vitro cytotoxicity studies (MTT) inA549 cell lines
The impact of the prepared siRNA-LHRH delivery systems on cell
cytotoxicity was determined by using MTT assay on A549 cells. The
cell viability of the CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs (LHRH-targeted), PLGA NP
(non-targeted), and CUR suspension was determined in vitro
utilizing MTT colorimetric assay against A549 lung cancer cell lines
at 24 h (Fig. 3A) and 48 h post-treatment (Fig. 3B) The result
demonstrated significant enhancement in cytotoxicity of drugs in
using siRNA conjugate. A comparison between the % viability of
different formulations according to concentration is shown in Fig. 3
C. The IC50 value for the treatments with CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs
(LHRH-targeted) and CUR-PLGA NP formulations was found to be
lower as compared to free-CUR. The results are shown in Table 2.
Fig. 3
[image]
Cell viability of study of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs, CUR-PLGA NP, and
CUR suspension on A549 cells after 24 h (A) and 48 h (B)
treatment. C IC50 values the three formulations after 24 h and 48 h
treatment
Full size image
Table 2 IC50 values of A549 cells after 24 and 48 h of
treatment (mean ± SD, n = 3)
Full size table
In vitro cell uptake studies

In vitro cellular uptake of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs, CUR-PLGA NPs
formulations, and CUR suspension was determined in A549 human
lung cancer cells by fluorescent technique. The results showed the
cellular uptake increased with time (2, 4, and 6 h) showing
the highest uptake at 6 h in all three treatments as shown in Fig. 4.
The cellular uptake in CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs was comparatively
higher than Cur-PLGA NPs with the curcumin suspension showing
the least uptake.
Fig. 4
[image]
Fluorescence images of qualitative cellular uptake of CUR-SiRNA-
PPL NPs, CUR-PLGA NP, and CUR suspension in A549 cells after 2,
4, and 6 h of treatment
Full size image
Determination of the extent of suppression of targeted
gene
To determine the gene suppression effects of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs,
the reduction in MDR1 and BCL2 mRNA levels was quantitatively
assessed using the qRT-PCR method on A549 lung cancer cells.
After the treatment, RNA was extracted and cDNA was synthesized.
The quantification of the extracted cDNA was done with the help of
a microplate reader (Synergy BIOTEK), and the amount was found
to be 14.217 ng/µl. Then, Ct values and the relative fold change
values were calculated from the data obtained in qRT-PCR. The
results showed the levels of MDR1 and BCL2 mRNA in the treated
A549 cells were significantly lowered by ~ 87.57% and ~ 68.70%,
respectively, compared to those in the untreated A549 cells (Fig. 5
A and B respectively) conforming to the considerable
downregulation of P-gp and Bcl2 mRNA gene.
Fig. 5
[image]
Quantitative measurement of gene expression by qRT-PCR method
for (A) p-gp and (B) bCL2 on A549 lung cancer cells after 24h of

treatment. (C) The expression levels of p-gp and BCL2 proteins
measured by immunoblotting method after 24h treatment. All
results are represented as the mean ± s.d (n = 3). The asterik(*)
represents statistical significance of (p ≤ 0.05)
Full size image
Western blot studies
Western blotting studies were performed to determine the
expression of Bcl2 and P-gp proteins in A549 cancer cells. A typical
immunoblotting picture (Fig. 5 C) was shown after each gel was
conducted under identical experimental settings. The quantitative
levels of P-gp or Bcl2 proteins were plotted by taking β actin as
a control. The expression levels of Bcl2 and P-gp protein in A549
cells were significantly reduced after treatment with CUR-SiRNA-
PPL NPs.
Pharmacokinetic study
The effect of the formulation on the extent of absorption and
systemic circulation was then observed in Wistar rats. The
pharmacokinetic study was conducted by analyzing the drug
concentration in the collected blood samples from the treated rats.
Extraction of curcumin from the plasma of Wistar rats was obtained
as per the method explained in the methodology section using
methanol and ethyl acetate. The plasma drug concentration–time
profiles and pharmacokinetic parameters, such as tmax, Cmax, AUC0–
24, AUC0-∞, and t1/2 of curcumin for each formulation were
determined and are shown in Table 3. The pharmacokinetic profile
of Free Cur, Cur-PLGA NP, and CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs was evaluated
based on key parameters. The plasma drug concentration profile
(Fig. 6 B) of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs showed significant enhancement
in drug absorption compared to the reference formulation. Cur-
PLGA NP and CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs exhibited prolonged half-lives
(T½) of 12.9 ± 3.29 and 11.1 ± 1.71 h, respectively, compared to
CUR suspension (5.1 ± 0.94 h). Both formulations demonstrated
higher AUC values, approximately 3.8 and sixfold greater than that
of CUR suspension respectively, indicating enhanced bioavailability.
Notably, CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs displayed the highest AUC0-∞ (82.1 

± 3.9 uM*hr) and Cmax (4.6 ± 0.58 uM), suggesting sustained
release and increased peak concentration.
Table 3 Pharmacokinetic parameters of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs,
Cur-PLGA NP, and CUR suspension in rats (mean ± SD, n = 6)
Full size table
Fig. 6
[image]
A Plasma Drug concentration-time curve of three different
treatments (n = 6), B Quantitative distribution of CUR in tissues of
rats following iv administration of three treatments (mean ± S.D, n
= 3)
Full size image
In vivo biodistribution study
The concentration of CUR in different tissues was determined by
performing in vivo biodistribution in B(a) P-induced lung cancer-
bearing balb/c mice. The biodistribution study was performed at
a 24-h time point after intravenous administration of free CUR,
CUR-PPL NPs, and CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs in Balb/c mice and isolated
the distinct organs like lung, liver, kidney, heart, and spleen. The
comparative biodistribution of drugs in different organs in the three
treatment groups is shown in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6 B, the drug
in the free CUR-treated group was mainly distributed to the spleen
and liver, and a very small amount to the lung, heart, and kidney
after 24 h of injection. However, the SiRNA-CUR-PPL NPs group
showed a significant amount of curcumin (5.80 ± 0.62 ng/g) in
the lung as compared to the other examined organs. SiRNA-CUR-
PPL NP groups did not exhibit a significant increase in drug
accumulation. Furthermore, CUR-PPL NP-treated groups also
showed higher drug concentration in the lung (4.17 ± 0.84 ng/g) as
compared to the other organs, but the drug concentration was lesser
than the siRNA-CUR-PPL NP-treated groups. From the study, it was
observed that siRNA-CUR-PPL NP exhibited maximum drug
concentration in the lung tumor tissue than CUR-PPL NP (P < 0.05)
and free-CUR groups (P < 0.05) but not in the other organs.

In vivo anticancer study
The in vivo anticancer activity in human lung cancer-bearing Balb/
c mice was used to further confirm the in vitro antitumor activity
results. At certain intervals (0, 3, 6, 9, and 12 days), the
corresponding treatments were given to the animals. On the 15th
day, it was observed that the CUR-siRNA-PPL NP group's mean
tumor volume (18 ± 4.6 mm3) was notably lower than (Fig. 7) that
of the CUR-PPL NP group (64 ± 8.5 mm3), CUR-Susp group (112.5 
± 17.4 mm3), Blank-PPL NP group (1008 ± 27 mm3) and saline
control group (1666 ± 36 mm3). The results showed that the tumor
grew very fast in mice with treatments of saline group and PPL
blank NPs. Tumor growth was also evident in other organs of
the spleen, liver, and intestine indicating metastasis in these groups
as shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. While every treatment group
using drug-encapsulated NCs showed some degree of antitumor
activity. The tumor size reduction was found to be in the following
order of magnitude when compared to the saline group, CUR-
siRNA-PPL NP > CUR-PPL NP > CUR-Susp > Blank-PPL NP. The
delivery of CUR-siRNA-PPL NP exhibited the strongest anticancer
efficacy. The percentage tumor inhibition ratio (TIR%) on the 15th
day was found as 66.89% for the CUR-siRNA-PPL NP groups, which
was higher than the CUR-PPL NP group (59.84%), CUR-Susp group
(45.05%) and blank-PPL NP-treated group (12.99%) (Fig. 7).
Fig. 7
[image]
In vivo tumor inhibition ratios (TIR%) in benzo(a) pyrene induced
lung cancer bearing mice (n = 6) treated with Saline, blank -PPL
NP, CUR-PPL NP, CUR-siRNA -PPL NP and CUR-Susp
Full size image
TNF-α and p53 estimation
P53 level was found to increase showing 96.41 pg/ml for negative
control, whereas 187.84 pg/ml and 151.08 pg/ml for CUR-siRNA-
PPL NCs and CUR-PPL NCs, respectively. Moreover, the levels of
TNFα were found to be reduced from 161.93 pg/ml for negative

control to 25.54 pg/ml and 68.86 pg/ml for CUR-siRNA-PPL NCs
and CUR-PPL NCs, respectively.
Histopathology study
The histopathological results supported the tumor inhibition study
results revealing varying degrees of tissue alterations across
different groups and healing (Fig. 8). After 15 days of treatment and
subsequent isolation of lung tissue, it was observed that the lung
tissues of the control group displayed normal histological
architecture with well-defined alveolar spaces, bronchioles, and
blood vessels (Fig. 8A). Saline-treated group (Fig. 8B) and blank
PPL NP-treated groups (Fig. 8C) exhibited a well-defined tumor
with a fibrous capsule, increased fibrosis, inflammatory cell
infiltration, severe squamous epithelial thickening, mild bronchitis,
interalveolar hemorrhages, and bronchiolar epithelium thickening.
CUR-PPL NP-treated group (Fig. 8D) also showed moderate
inflammatory cell infiltration, mild bronchitis, interalveolar
hemorrhages, and bronchiolar epithelium thickening. In CUR-
SiRNA-PPL NP-treated group (Fig. 8E) displayed mild to moderate
inflammatory cells. Mild fibrosis was noted in some areas,
suggesting tissue remodeling and repair. The free CUR-treated
group (Fig. 8F) demonstrated moderate inflammatory cell
infiltration, blood vessel congestion, alveolar space inflation, and
mild septal inflammation. The CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP group showed
mild inflammatory and vascular changes with some normal alveolar
structures, suggesting a less severe pathological condition. Whereas,
the saline-treated group and blank PPL NP showed inflammation,
with extensive hyperchromatic cell proliferation and severe
vascular congestion.
Fig. 8
[image]
Histopathology images of tissue samples from the lung tumor; mice
(n = 6) were treated with (A) control group, (B) saline group (C)
PPL blank NP, (D) CUR-PPL NP, (E) CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs, (F) CUR
suspension
Full size image

Discussion
Lung cancer is one of the leading frequent subtypes of cancer that
leads to death in humans. Although chemotherapy is the most
efficient method of treatment for lung cancer, its inherent toxicity
and drug resistance have hindrances in its effectiveness. Drug
resistance primarily occurs through pump and non-pump
mechanisms [10]. In most of the studies, the pump mechanism is a
major concern in the development of therapies for resistant cases.
However, a more wholesome approach is needed directing at both
pump and non-pump mechanisms. Reports of studies on this type of
approach are very limited. However, combination therapies with
co-delivering down regulators of both pump and non-pump
mechanisms have high potential. This along with selective delivery
of anticancer drugs toward cancer cells through active targeting
may result in more efficient lung cancer therapies. Hence in the
current study, an attempt is made to develop a combination therapy
by using curcumin, which is an effective anticancer drug and P-gp
inhibitor [15, 49], and siRNA targeting BCL-2 mRNA. Besides, a
nanoconjugate was also developed by using LHRH peptide for site-
specific delivery which innovatively addressed systemic toxicity and
drug resistance in lung cancer chemotherapy. LHRH targeting
reduces non-specific interactions, lowering systemic toxicities,
increasing vesicle accumulation at the lung tumor site, and
enhancing therapeutic efficacy [50]. In the present work, therefore
a PPL conjugate system was developed for the selective delivery to
the target cells.
The PPCH copolymer was synthesized from the activated acid-
terminated PLGA followed by a reaction with heterofunctional PEG
and NH2-PEG-COOH. The structure of the copolymer PPCH was
confirmed using FTIR and 1H NMR. The targeting ligand (LHRH)
was then conjugated with this synthesized di-block polymer PPCH
by carbodiimide chemistry to form PPL using DMAP as a catalyst.
The confirmation of the formation of PPL nanoconjugate was
performed by FTIR, 1H NMR, XPS, and BCA analyses of the free
polymer and the conjugates. FTIR analysis was used to confirm the
conjugation of LHRH to PPCH. The FTIR spectra for acid-terminated
PLGA displayed characteristic peaks at 1743 cm−1 for the C = O
stretch and 1161 cm−1 and 1080 cm−1 corresponding to the C − O

stretch of PLGA. In addition to the peaks for PLGA, the spectra of
the PPCH conjugate (Fig. 1 A) exhibited additional peaks at
2945 cm−1of C − H stretch of CH2, 1566 cm−1 for N–H amide,
1359 cm−1 for C-H bending of alkane group, 1277 cm−1 for C-O
stretching ether and 961 cm−1 for C-H stretching of alkane group,
thereby, confirming the covalent conjugation of acid-terminated
PLGA with NH2-PEG-COOH and thus, synthesis of diblock
copolymer PPCH. The FTIR spectra for PPL (Fig. 1 A) revealed
additional peaks, in addition to those observed for PPCH, at
3302.82 cm−1 for the NH stretch of amide, 1560 cm−1 for the -NH
amide bands, and an increased intensity at 1650 cm−1
corresponding to the C = O amide/peptide bond. These
observations confirm the formation of the PPL conjugate.
The standard 1H NMR spectra were analyzed for acid-terminated
PLGA and the peaks obtained at 1.47 ppm (-CH3) Methyl, 4.8 ppm
(-CH2-) Methylene, and 5.2 ppm (-CH-) Methine of PLGA lactide. At
3.5 ppm, an additional peak (Fig. 1 C) was observed in the case of
PPL corresponding to the (-CH2-) Methylene group of PEG, a small
peak at 7.0 ppm corresponding to an aromatic proton, 2.49 to
2.5 ppm corresponding to (NCOCH3), at 4.9 and 5.2 corresponding
to glycolide and lactide respectively. Thus, the finding confirms the
synthesis of PPL. The conjugation of LHRH to PPCH was further
verified based on the presence of a nitrogen peak in XPS
corresponding to amide formation with the peptide which was
originally absent in the PLGA-curcumin nanoparticle. The BCA
protein assay reported the presence of LHRH in a significant
amount in the PPL conjugate confirming of conjugation of the
peptide ligand to the PPCH intermediate.
The curcumin and bclsR were co-loaded in the PLGA
nanoformulation by the double emulsion (w1/o/w2) solvent
evaporation followed by the ultra-sonication method. These were
optimized using different variables like sonication time, different
stabilizers, and concentration of stabilizer, etc. In this study,
curcumin being the hydrophobic drug was directly added to
the organic phase containing the PPL conjugate. It was then
emulsified with the aqueous phase containing siRNA along with PLL
in nuclease-free water. PLL has been used as it is reported to result
in better siRNA entrapment in the nanoparticles and avoid the

toxicity to polyethyleneimine (PEI) which is mostly used otherwise
[20]. The size, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential are the
important properties that affect the stability and performance of
NPs. The prepared siRNA- and CUR-loaded PPLNPs (CUR-SiRNA-
PPL NPs) offer stealth properties with the help of PEG coating
against opsonin adsorption and macrophage interaction resulting in
reduced RES uptake. It also creates a hydrophilic surface, enhancing
solubility and prolonging circulation time in vivo. These properties
indirectly increase vesicle accumulation at the tumor site via the
EPR effect [20, 23]. The EPR effect in tumor targeting is enhanced
by NP of sizes between 100 and 200 nm [29]. The mean particle
sizes of the NPs were found less than < 200 nm, which is clinically
relevant for tumor targeting by the EPR effect [23]. The decrease in
size of the resulting PLGA NPs might be due to the PEGylation of
PLGA which could be due to the hydrophilic properties of PEG,
causing a decrease in the tension at the interface of organic and
aqueous phase [20]. The homogeneity and small size of the
resulting NPs might also be due to the sonication during
emulsification where the high energy is released [51]. The prepared
NPs showed good stability in terms of zeta potential which could be
attributed to the presence of PVA as the steric stabilizer. Some
amount of steric stabilization is also due to the PEG segment due to
the salvation effect [52]. The TEM images showed spherical and
homogeneous NPs with no aggregation and the conjugated NPs
showed a notable outer layer of mushroom-like structure on the NPs
surface, which may be due to the surface conjugation of LHRH
supporting the core–shell structure and potentially targeting the
LHRH receptor of cancer cells [53].
The HPLC method was optimized with 85:15 v/v of acetonitrile to
water (2% acetic acid) as mobile phase, with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/
min. The prepared CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs showed high curcumin
entrapment which may be due to the high solubility of the drug in
the lipophilic core. The solubility and stability of poorly water-
soluble drugs (e.g., CUR) can be improved by surrounding the
molecules inside a nanocarrier. The inclusion of CUR into the core
of PLGA NPs significantly increased the solubility and effectiveness
of the anticancer property [54]. The siRNA encapsulation efficiency
was exceptionally high, indicating robust incorporation of siRNA
within the PLGA NPs, emphasizing their effectiveness as a delivery

system. This high entrapment of curcumin and siRNA was very
essential for sufficient release and absorption of these drugs. From
the release study, the cumulative percent drug release was observed
approximately 83 ± 2% in 24 h indicating a sustained release. This
could be due to the stable incorporation of the drug within the
PLGA core of the nanoconjugates, and the polymeric shell restricted
rapid drug release into the dialysate [7, 52].
The impact of the prepared siRNA-LHRH delivery systems on cell
cytotoxicity was determined by using MTT assay on A549 cells. The
result demonstrated significant enhancement in the cytotoxicity of
drugs in using siRNA conjugate. The IC50 value for the treatments
with CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs (LHRH-targeted) and CUR-PLGA NP
formulations was found to be lower as compared to free-CUR. The
observed reduction in IC50 values (by more than twofold) for
LHRH-targeted NPs may be attributed to the affinity-based targeting
of the LHRH ligand, which likely enhanced the accumulation of NCs
within the cells [41]. According to the literature, higher
cytotoxicity of NP-formulated drugs arises from NPs adsorbing on
the cell surface, increasing local drug concentration, and creating a
gradient that enhances drug influx into the cell [55]. The capacity
of NCs to accumulate within the cells may be the cause of the
variation in cell viability between the free-drug and NCs form of
CUR, as demonstrated by the outcomes of in vitro cellular uptake.
In vitro cellular uptake was determined in A549 human lung cancer
cells by fluorescent technique. The cellular uptake in CUR-SiRNA-
PPL NPs was comparatively higher than Cur-PLGA NPs with the
curcumin suspension showing the least uptake. This increased
cellular uptake might be due to the ligand-mediated internalization
in the tumor cells and enhanced permeability and retention in the
tumor cells. This might have resulted in a higher concentration of
the drug resulting in increased cytotoxicity. Similar studies using
LHRH as a targeting moiety have shown enhanced cellular uptake
of LHRH-linked nanoformulations compared to non-targeted ones in
breast Cancer [56] and lung Cancer [57].
Another important aspect of the study was to decrease the
resistance by downregulating both pump and non-pump
mechanism. Accordingly, the p-gp inhibition potential of curcumin
and BCL2 downregulation by bclsR was explored. P-gp is mainly

responsible for drug efflux and Bcl-2 mRNA is responsible for
controlling cell survival. So, the control of P-gp and Bcl2 gene
expression is vital for the effectiveness of anticancer drug delivery.
The downregulation of these two genes was quantitatively
determined by the qRT-PCR method on A549 lung cancer cells. To
determine the gene suppression effects of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs, the
reduction in MDR1 and BCL2 mRNA levels was quantitatively
assessed using the qRT-PCR method on A549 lung cancer cells. The
results showed the levels of MDR1 and BCL2 mRNA in the treated
A549 cells were significantly lowered compared to those in the
untreated A549 cells conforming to the considerable
downregulation of the P-gp and Bcl2 mRNA gene. The
downregulation of the P-gp expression could be attributed to
curcumin which is also a potential P-gp inhibitor supporting similar
reports by Choi et al., (2008) who have shown earlier that curcumin
(15–45 µM) downregulates P-gp expression within 48 h of
treatment in resistant L1210/Adr cells. The bclsR was effective in
silencing of Bcl2 mRNA expression. Similar downregulation of
Bcl2mRNA has been reported earlier by siRNA [10, 24]. The
obtained downregulations in the present study hold significance
considering that reports of such downregulations by both
mechanisms are very limited. This silencing effect of CUR-siRNA-
PPL NP on P-gp and Bcl2 proteins was further analyzed via western
blot analysis by using specific primary antibodies for P-gp and Bcl2
proteins. The quantitative levels of P-gp or Bcl2 proteins were
plotted by taking β actin as a control. The expression levels of Bcl2
and P-gp protein in A549 cells were significantly reduced after
treatment with CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs. Overexpressing P-gp can lead
to a significant reduction in intracellular drug concentrations by
mediating drug efflux [58]. After treatment with CUR-siRNA-PPL
NPs, P-gp protein expression was efficiently reduced, indicating that
NPs can reverse MDR through the P-gp pathway. Also, the
concurrent administration of CUR and bclsR effectively silenced the
Bcl2 mRNA, reducing the non-pump resistance and hence increasing
the anticancer effects of CUR. From the results, the considerable
drop in P-gp and Bcl2 protein levels suggests that the produced NPs
can effectively down-regulate the expression of both genes that are
strongly linked to both pump and non-pump types of resistance
[24]. The results are in line with earlier reports of downregulation
by Taratula et al. [10], and Chen et al. [8] showing that bclsR

successfully downregulated Bcl-2 mRNA, greatly reducing non-
pump resistance, and increasing the activity of anticancer drugs.
Hence, the proposed nanoconjugate system delivers anticancer
drugs and siRNA into lung cancer cells, inducing cell death and
suppressing pump and non-pump drug resistance. This targeted DDS
preserves the specific activity of both, enhancing drug cytotoxicity
through simultaneous cell death induction and resistance
suppression.
The effect of the formulation on the extent of absorption and
systemic circulation was then observed in Wistar rats. The plasma
drug concentration profile of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs showed
significant enhancement in drug absorption compared to the
reference formulation. Cur-PLGA NP and CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs
exhibited prolonged half-lives (T½) of 12.9 ± 3.29 and 11.1 ± 
1.71 h, respectively, compared to Cur suspension (5.1 ± 0.94 h).
This may be attributed to the long circulating sustained release
behavior of the PPL conjugate as well as Clearnace evading
mechanism due to the PEG Sheath [59]. Similar results with
docetaxel-based PLGA-PEG Nanoparticles have been reported by
Rafieie and Hadadi [60]. Both formulations demonstrated higher
AUC values, approximately 3.8 and sixfold greater than that of CUR
suspension respectively, indicating enhanced bioavailability.
Notably, CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs displayed the highest AUC0-∞ (82.1 
± 3.9 uM*hr) and Cmax (4.6 ± 0.58 uM), suggesting sustained
release and increased peak concentration. These findings suggest
that the nanoformulations improve the pharmacokinetic parameters
of curcumin, potentially enhancing its therapeutic efficacy. The
pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that the groups administered
with CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs and CUR-PLGA NPs showed significantly
greater tmax than groups with CUR suspension indicating a more
sustained release. This may be because the drug is released from the
core of polymeric NPs indicating a more sustained release and
absorption of the drug in these groups. In comparison with the
control group (CUR suspension), a large magnitude of AUC0–24 and
AUC0-∞ in the test group was observed. This indicates a high level
of drug availability over a longer period in the plasma. This can be
attributed to the nanoparticulate size of < 200 nm resulting
in greater surface area for absorption and also due to the drug's
long-term sustained release behavior from the polymeric core in the

in vivo system. The half-life (t1/2) of the drug in the test group was
much longer than the control group, indicating that the drug release
behavior was sustained. This may also be attributed to the
PEGylation resulting in reduced RES uptake. The improved blood
retention of CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs is attributed to their uniform,
slightly negative charges, and delayed drug release. This long
circulation and sustained release enhance tumor site accumulation
via the EPR effect and reduce systemic toxicity [30]. One such
study by Li et al., (2014) showed prolonged blood circulation,
retaining over 7% after 24 h for the LHRH-targeted Cisplatin
nanoparticles as compared to free cisplatin [30].
The concentration of CUR in different tissues was determined by
performing in vivo biodistribution in B(a) P-induced lung cancer-
bearing balb/c mice. The biodistribution study was performed at
a 24-h time point after intravenous administration of free CUR,
CUR-PPL NPs, and CUR-SiRNA-PPL NPs in Balb/c mice and isolated
the distinct organs like lung, liver, kidney, heart, and spleen. The
drug in the free CUR-treated group was mainly distributed to the
spleen and liver and a very small amount to the lung, heart, and
kidney after 24 h of injection. However, the SiRNA-CUR-PPL NPs
group showed a significant amount of curcumin in the lung as
compared to the other examined organs, indicating that drug
loading is improved in the lung tumor target site and reduced in
other organs. In comparison with other normal tissues, SiRNA-CUR-
PPL NP groups did not exhibit a significant increase in drug
accumulation. Furthermore, CUR-PPL NP-treated groups also
showed higher drug concentration in the lung as compared to the
other organs, but the drug concentration was lesser than the siRNA-
CUR-PPL NP-treated groups. From the study, it was observed that
siRNA-CUR-PPL NP exhibited maximum drug concentration in the
lung tumor tissue than CUR-PPL NP (P < 0.05) and CUR suspension
groups (P < 0.05) but not in the other organs. This can be
attributed to the active targeting of cancerous cells with
overexpressed receptors due to the LHRH ligand. The phenomenon
of LHRH peptide binding is indeed responsible for the increased
drug accumulation in the tumor. The study further demonstrates the
superiority of active tumor targeting over passive macromolecular
treatment targeting via the EPR phenomenon. Thus, the selective
penetration and cytotoxic effect of the anticancer medication to the

tumor can be improved by using LHRH peptide as a targeting
moiety in DDS for the treatment of malignancies that overexpress
LHRHRs. However, this selective delivery to lung cancer cells may
also be attributed to passive targeting due to the size of the
nanoconjugates thereby avoiding the RES uptake to the liver and
spleen. This behavior may also be attributed to PEGylation which
results in enhanced circulation time as has been reported similar
studies by Koopaei et al. 2014, Zhang et al. [61, 62]. As can be
observed the major organ of distribution of CUR-Sus was found to
be liver and spleen. Similar distributions in liver have also been
reported for similar formulations for docetaxel [60] Anticancer
medications can be used in these situations at modest dosages,
which prevent negative side effects and increase therapeutic
effectiveness [30, 63]. Similar results showing reduced non-specific
distribution were also reported in studies Giram S et al. in PLGA-
based surface modified nanoparticles for active targeting in cancer
[64]
The in vivo anticancer activity in human lung cancer-bearing Balb/
c mice was used to further confirm the in vitro antitumor activity
results. The results showed that the tumor grew very fast in mice
with treatments of saline group and PPL blank NPs. Tumor growth
was also evident in other organs of the spleen, liver, and intestine
indicating metastasis in these groups. While every treatment group
using drug-encapsulated NCs showed some degree of antitumor
activity. The tumor size reduction was found to be in the following
order of magnitude when compared to the saline group, CUR-
siRNA-PPL NP > CUR-PPL NP > CUR-Susp > Blank-PPL NP. The
delivery of CUR-siRNA-PPL NP exhibited the strongest anticancer
efficacy. The percentage tumor inhibition ratio (TIR%) on the 15th
day was found higher than the CUR-PPL NP group, CUR-Susp group
and blank-PPL NP-treated group. These findings showed that CUR-
siRNA-PPL NP was superior to free drug solution and non-targeted
NPs as the most successful therapy for decreasing the tumor
volume. This enhanced antitumor activity may be due to siRNA
targeting BCL2 mRNA, suppressing cellular antiapoptotic defenses.
Substantial drug accumulation at the tumor location was
accomplished by actively targeting the NPs with the LHRH peptide
and combining the EPR effect with receptor-mediated endocytosis
by increasing cellular uptake [6, 10]. Cur-susp-treated group

showed moderate anticancer efficacy which could be attributed to
the poor absorption as has been evidenced in the lower AUC of the
drug when administered as suspension. The results following the
anticancer studies showed a decrease in the TNF-α and an increase
in p53 levels indicating healing in the CUR-siRNA-PPL NCs and
CUR-PPL NCs group mice suggesting induction of apoptosis due to
the curcumin or bclsR-mediated downregulation of bcl2 as has been
observed earlier.
The histopathological results supported the tumor inhibition study
results revealing varying degrees of tissue alterations across
different groups and healing. After 15 days of treatment, it was
observed that the lung tissues of the control group displayed normal
histological architecture with well-defined alveolar spaces,
bronchioles, and blood vessels. No signs of inflammation, fibrosis,
or necrosis were observed in the uninduced group. Saline-treated
group and blank PPL NP-treated groups exhibited a well-defined
tumor with a fibrous capsule, increased fibrosis, inflammatory cell
infiltration, severe squamous epithelial thickening, mild bronchitis,
interalveolar hemorrhages, and bronchiolar epithelium thickening.
CUR-PPL NP-treated group had also shown moderate inflammatory
cell infiltration, mild bronchitis, interalveolar hemorrhages, and
bronchiolar epithelium thickening. In CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP-treated
group displayed mild to moderate inflammatory cells which are
primarily composed of lymphocytes and macrophages, blood vessel
congestion, alveolar hemorrhages, and generally normal alveoli.
Mild fibrosis was noted in some areas, suggesting tissue remodeling
and repair. The free CUR-treated group demonstrated moderate
inflammatory cell infiltration, blood vessel congestion, alveolar
space inflation, and mild septal inflammation. The findings
highlight the variability in tissue response across different groups,
ranging from severe tumor development and inflammation to mild
pathological changes. The CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP group showed mild
inflammatory and vascular changes with some normal alveolar
structures, suggesting a less severe pathological condition, whereas
the saline-treated group and blank PPL NP showed inflammation,
with extensive hyperchromatic cell proliferation and severe
vascular congestion, suggesting aggressive tumor growth and
compromised blood flow and the CUR-PPL NP group and CUR
suspension group displayed moderate inflammatory infiltration and

alveolar changes, indicating an intermediate level of tissue damage
and response. These results provide valuable insights into the
progression of lung pathology under different conditions and the
effectiveness of the treatments administered. The observed
inflammation and mild fibrosis are indicative of an immune
response and tissue remodeling, which are common following
effective anticancer treatments. These findings suggest that while
the treatment is effective in reducing tumor burden, ongoing
monitoring for potential adverse effects is necessary [47, 65].
Conclusion
The study developed a combination therapy for lung cancer using
curcumin and siRNA targeting BCL2 mRNA, delivered via PPLNPs.
This system targets cancer cells through the LHRH ligand, reducing
systemic toxicity and increasing drug accumulation at the tumor
site. The PPL copolymer was synthesized and confirmed through
various analyses, and the NPs showed efficient drug and siRNA
entrapment with sustained release properties. In vitro studies
revealed significant cytotoxicity and enhanced uptake of the NPs in
A549 lung cancer cells. The combination therapy effectively
downregulated P-gp and BCL2 mRNA, addressing both pump and
non-pump resistance mechanisms. In vivo, pharmacokinetic analysis
in rats showed sustained drug release and increased bioavailability.
Biodistribution studies confirmed preferential drug accumulation in
the lungs. In vivo, anticancer studies in mice demonstrated superior
tumor inhibition with the combination therapy, supported by
histopathological observations indicating reduced tumor
development and inflammation. These findings suggest that the
proposed targeted delivery system holds promise for more effective
lung cancer treatment by enhancing therapeutic efficacy and
minimizing adverse effects. Future studies investigating the
potential for combining this therapy with other agents could
enhance its therapeutic impact and broaden its applicability to
other resistant cancer types. The effectiveness of conjugating LHRH
with siRNA may potentially be investigated in other malignancies
where LHRHR is overexpressed. Additionally, more studies may be
encouraged to further assess biodistribution and systemic toxicity
and validate the system's translational potential.

Availability of data and material
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current
study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable
request.
Abbreviations
LHRH:
Luteinizing-hormone releasing hormone
PLGA:
Poly (DL-lactide co-glycolide acid)
PPL:
PLGA-PEG-LHRH
bclsR:
Bcl2siRNA
FTIR:
Fourier transform infrared
NMR:
Nuclear magnetic resonance
XPS:
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
BCA:
Bicinchoninic acid
TEM:

Transmission electron microscope
AUC:
Area under curve
p-gp:
P-glycoprotein
PNPs:
Polymeric nanoparticles
FDA:
Food and Drug Administration
PVA:
Polyvinyl alcohol
PLL:
Poly-L-lysine
NHS:
N-Hydroxysuccinimide
EDC:
1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide
DMAP:
4-Dimethyl aminopyridine
DIPEA:
N,N-diisopropylethylamine
DMSO:

Dimethyl sulfoxide
MTT:
Methyl thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide
PBS:
Phosphate-buffered saline
FBS:
Fetal bovine serum
PPCH:
PLGA-PEG-COOH
CUR-SiRNA-PPL NP:
Curcumin- and siRNA-loaded PPL nanoparticle
PDI:
Polydispersity index
DEE:
Drug entrapment efficiency
DMSO:
Di methyl sulfoxide
B(a)P:
Benzo(a)pyrene
TIR:
Tumor inhibition ratio
H&E:

Hematoxylin and eosin
PCR:
Polymer chain reaction
CUR:
Curcumin
CUR susp:
Curcumin suspension
References
1. Norouzi M, Hardy P (2021) Clinical applications of
nanomedicines in lung cancer treatment. Acta Biomater
121:134–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2020.12.009
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
2. Thakur SK, Singh DP, Choudhary J (2020) Lung cancer
identification: a review on detection and classification.
Cancer Metastasis Rev 39(3):989–998. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10555-020-09901-x
Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
3. Alexandru I, Davidescu L, Motofelea AC, Ciocarlie T,
Motofelea N, Costachescu D, Crintea A (2024) Emerging
nanomedicine approaches in targeted lung cancer treatment.
Int J Mol Sci 25(20):11235
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
4. Sarma K, Akther MH, Ahmad I, Afzal O, Altamimi ASA,
Alossaimi MA, Jaremko M, Emwas A (2024) Adjuvant novel
nanocarrier-based targeted therapy for lung cancer. Molecules
29:1076. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules29051076

Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
5. Cryer AM, Thorley AJ (2019) Nanotechnology in the
diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer. Pharmacol Ther
198:189–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pharmthera.2019.02.010
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
6. Zugazagoitia J, Guedes C, Ponce S, Ferrer I, Molina-Pinelo S,
Paz-Ares L (2016) Current challenges in cancer treatment.
Clin Ther 38(7):1551–1566. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.clinthera.2016.03.026
Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
7. Shitole AA, Sharma N, Giram P et al (2020) LHRH-
conjugated, PEGylated, poly-lactide-co-glycolidenanocapsules
for targeted delivery of combinational chemotherapeutic
drugs Docetaxel and Quercetin for prostate cancer. Mater Sci
Eng C 114:111035. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.msec.2020.111035
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
8. Chen AM, Zhang M, Wei D et al (2009) Co-delivery of
doxorubicin and Bcl-2 siRNA by mesoporous silica
nanoparticles enhances the efficacy of chemotherapy in
multidrug resistant cancer cells. Small 5(23):2673. https://
doi.org/10.1002/smLl.200900621
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
9. Song Y, Zhou B, Du X et al (2020) Folic acid (FA)-conjugated
mesoporous silica nanoparticles combined with MRP-1 siRNA
improves the suppressive effects of myricetin on non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Biomed Pharmacother 125:109561.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109561
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
10. Taratula O, Garbuzenko O, Savla R, Andrew Wang Y, He H,

Minko T (2011) Multifunctional nanomedicine platform for
cancer specific delivery of siRNA by superparamagnetic iron
oxide nanoparticles-dendrimer complexes. Curr Drug Deliv
8(1):59–69. https://doi.org/10.2174/156720111793663642
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
11. Zheng G, Shen Y, Zhao R et al (2017) Dual-targeting
multifuntional mesoporous silica nanocarrier for codelivery of
siRNA and ursolic acid to folate receptor overexpressing
cancer cells. J Agric Food Chem 65(32):6904–6911. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.7b03047
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
12. Imran M, Ullah A, Saeed F, Nadeem M, Arshad MU, Suleria
HAR (2018) Cucurmin, anticancer, & antitumor perspectives:
A comprehensive review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 58(8):1271–
1293. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2016.1252711
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
13. Wan Mohd Tajuddin WNB, Lajis NH, Abas F, Othman I, Naidu
R (2019) Mechanistic understanding of curcumin’s
therapeutic effects in lung cancer. Nutrients 11(12):2989.
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu11122989
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
14. Dao TPT, Nguyen TH, Ho TH, Nguyen TA, Dang MC (2014) A
new formulation of curcumin using poly (lactic-co-glycolic
acid)—polyethylene glycol diblock copolymer as carrier
material. Adv Nat Sci Nanosci Nanotechnol 5(3):035013.
https://doi.org/10.1088/2043-6262/5/3/035013
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
15. Feng T, Wei Y, Lee RJ, Zhao L (2017) Liposomal curcumin
and its application in cancer. Int J Nanomed 52:6027–6044
Article  Google Scholar 

16. Moar K, Yadav S, Pant A, Deepika, & Maurya, P. K. (2024)
Anti-tumor effects of polyphenols via targeting cancer driving
signaling pathways: a review. IJCB 39(4):470–488. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12291-024-01222-y
Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
17. Kaur K, Al-Khazaleh AK, Bhuyan DJ, Li F, Li CG (2024) A
review of recent curcumin analogues and their antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and anticancer activities. Antioxidants
(Basel, Switzerland) 13(9):1092. https://doi.org/10.3390/
antiox13091092
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
18. Yan J, Wang Y, Zhang X, Liu S, Tian C, Wang H (2016)
Targeted nanomedicine for prostate cancer therapy: docetaxel
and curcumin co-encapsulated lipid–polymer hybrid
nanoparticles for the enhanced anti-tumor activity in vitro
and in vivo. Drug Deliv 23(5):1757–1762. https://
doi.org/10.3109/10717544.2015.1069423
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
19. Ashrafizadeh M, Najafi M, Makvandi P, Zarrabi A,
Farkhondeh T, Samarghandian S (2020) Versatile role of
curcumin and its derivatives in lung cancer therapy. J Cell
Physiol 235(12):9241–9268. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jcp.29819
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
20. El-Gogary RI, Rubio N, Wang JT-W et al (2014) Polyethylene
glycol conjugated polymeric nanocapsules for targeted
delivery of quercetin to folate-expressing cancer cells in vitro
and in vivo. ACS Nano 8(2):1384–1401. https://
doi.org/10.1021/nn405155b
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
21. Jiang Z-M, Dai S-P, Xu Y-Q et al (2015) Crizotinib-loaded
polymeric nanoparticles in lung cancer chemotherapy. Med

Oncol 32:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12032-015-0636-5
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
22. Sharma S, Parmar A, Kori S, Sandhir R (2016) PLGA-based
nanoparticles: a new paradigm in biomedical applications.
TrAC Trends Anal Chem 80:30–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.trac.2015.06.014
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
23. Cao L-B, Zeng S, Zhao W (2016) Highly stable PEGylated poly
(lactic-co-glycolic acid)(PLGA) nanoparticles for the effective
delivery of docetaxel in prostate cancers. Nanoscale Res Lett
11(1):305. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-016-1509-3
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
24. Risnayanti C, Jang Y-S, Lee J, Ahn HJ (2018) PLGA
nanoparticles co-delivering MDR1 and BCL2 siRNA for
overcoming resistance of paclitaxel and cisplatin in recurrent
or advanced ovarian cancer. Sci Rep 8(1):7498. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-25930-7
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
25. Patil Y, Panyam J (2009) Polymeric nanoparticles for siRNA
delivery and gene silencing. Int J Pharm 367(1–2):195–203.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2008.09.039
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
26. Cun D, Jensen DK, Maltesen MJ et al (2011) High loading
efficiency and sustained release of siRNA encapsulated in
PLGA nanoparticles: quality by design optimization and
characterization. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 77(1):26–35.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2010.11.008
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
27. Klippstein R, Wang JTW, El-Gogary RI et al (2015) Passively
targeted curcumin-loaded pegylated PLGA nanocapsules for

colon cancer therapy in vivo. Small 11(36):4704–4722.
https://doi.org/10.1002/smLl.201403799
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
28. Peer D, Karp JM, Hong S, Farokhzad OC, Margalit R, Langer
R (2020) Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer
therapy. Nano-Enabled Med Appl 52:61–91. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2007.387
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
29. Gu M, Luan J, Song K, Qiu C, Zhang X, Zhang M (2021)
Development of paclitaxel loaded pegylated gelatin targeted
nanoparticles for improved treatment efficacy in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC): an in vitro and in vivo evaluation
study. Acta Biochim Pol 68(4):583–591
CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
30. Li M, Tang Z, Zhang Y et al (2014) LHRH-peptide conjugated
dextran nanoparticles for targeted delivery of cisplatin to
breast cancer. J Mater Chem B 2(22):3490–3499. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C4TB00077C
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
31. Essa ML, El-Kemary MA, Ebrahem Saied EM, Leporatti S,
Nemany Hanafy NA (2020) Nano targeted therapies made of
lipids and polymers have promising strategy for the treatment
of lung cancer. Materials 13(23):5397. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ma13235397
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
32. Bar-Zeev M, Livney YD, Assaraf YG (2017) Targeted
nanomedicine for cancer therapeutics: towards precision
medicine overcoming drug resistance. Drug Resist Updat
31:15–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drup.2017.05.002
Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 

33. Garbuzenko OB, Kuzmov A, Taratula O, Pine SR, Minko T
(2019) Strategy to enhance lung cancer treatment by five
essential elements: inhalation delivery, nanotechnology,
tumor-receptor targeting, chemo-and gene therapy.
Theranostics 9(26):8362. https://doi.org/10.7150/
thno.39816
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
34. Sarma SK, Dutta U, Bharali A et al (2023) Isolation of
curcumin from Lakadong turmeric of Meghalaya and
development of its PLGA-Cur-NS loaded nanogel for potential
anti-inflammatory and cutaneous wound healing activity in
Wistar rats. Fut J Pharm Sci 9(1):85. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s43094-023-00534-9
Article  Google Scholar 
35. Borah C, Saikia T, Bharali A, Lahan M, Biswas N, Sahu BP
(2024) Development of paclitaxel proliposomal dry powder
inhaler (PTX-PLM-DPI) by freeze-drying method for lung
cancer. Drugs Drug Candidates 3(1):275–290. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ddc3010016
Article  Google Scholar 
36. Liu J, Xu L, Liu C et al (2012) Preparation and
characterization of cationic curcumin nanoparticles for
improvement of cellular uptake. Carbohydr Polymn 90(1):16–
22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2012.04.036
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
37. Cun D, Foged C, Yang M, Frøkjær S, Nielsen HM (2010)
Preparation and characterization of poly (DL-lactide-co-
glycolide) nanoparticles for siRNA delivery. Int J Pharm
390(1):70–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijpharm.2009.10.023
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
38. Hong Y, Che S, Hui B et al (2019) Lung cancer therapy using

doxorubicin and curcumin combination: targeted prodrug
based, pH sensitive nanomedicine. Biomed Pharmacother
112:108614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2019.108614
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
39. Li M, Fang G, Zahid F et al (2024) Co-delivery of paclitaxel
and curcumin loaded solid lipid nanoparticles for improved
targeting of lung cancer: In vitro and in vivo investigation.
Heliyon 10(9):63. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.heliyon.2024.e30290
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
40. Yang X-Z, Dou S, Sun T-M, Mao C-Q, Wang H-X, Wang J
(2011) Systemic delivery of siRNA with cationic lipid assisted
PEG-PLA nanoparticles for cancer therapy. J Control Release
156(2):203–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jconrel.2011.07.035
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
41. Taratula O, Garbuzenko OB, Chen AM, Minko T (2011)
Innovative strategy for treatment of lung cancer: targeted
nanotechnology-based inhalation co-delivery of anticancer
drugs and siRNA. J Drug Target 19(10):900–914. https://
doi.org/10.3109/1061186X.2011.622404
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
42. Bharadwaj R, Sahu BP, Haloi J et al (2019) Combinatorial
therapeutic approach for treatment of oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol 47(1):571–584.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2019.1573176
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
43. Sripetthong S, Nalinbenjapun S, Basit A, Surassmo S,
Sajomsang W, Ovatlarnporn C (2023) Preparation of self-
assembled, curcumin-loaded nano-micelles using quarternized
chitosan–vanillin imine (QCS-Vani Imine) conjugate and
evaluation of synergistic anticancer effect with cisplatin. J

Funct Biomater 14(10):525. https://doi.org/10.3390/
jfb14100525
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
44. Magesh V, DurgaBhavani K, Senthilnathan P, Rajendran P,
Sakthisekaran D (2009) In vivo protective effect of crocetin
on benzo (a) pyrene-induced lung cancer in Swiss albino
mice. Phytother Res 23(4):533–539. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ptr.2666
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
45. Velli SK, Sundaram J, Murugan M, Balaraman G,
Thiruvengadam D (2019) Protective effect of vanillic acid
against benzo (a) pyrene induced lung cancer in Swiss albino
mice. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 33(10):e22382. https://
doi.org/10.1002/jbt.22382
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
46. Kasala ER, Bodduluru LN, Barua CC et al (2016)
Chemopreventive effect of chrysin, a dietary flavone against
benzo (a) pyrene induced lung carcinogenesis in Swiss albino
mice. Pharmacol Rep 68:310–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pharep.2015.08.014
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
47. Sahu BP, Hazarika H, Bharadwaj R et al (2016) Curcumin-
docetaxel co-loaded nanosuspension for enhanced anti-breast
cancer activity. Expert Opin Drug Deliv 13(8):1065–1074.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17425247.2016.1182486
Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
48. McCall RL, Sirianni RW (2013) PLGA nanoparticles formed by
single-or double-emulsion with vitamin E-TPGS. JoVE
82:e51015
Google Scholar 

49. Hales D, Tefas LR, Tomuță I et al (2020) Development of a
curcumin-loaded polymeric microparticulate oral drug
delivery system for colon targeting by quality-by-design
approach. Pharmaceutics 12(11):1027. https://
doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics12111027
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
50. Li X, Taratula O, Taratula O, Schumann C, Minko T (2017)
LHRH-targeted drug delivery systems for cancer therapy. Mini
Rev Med Chem 17(3):258–267
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
51. Madani F, Esnaashari SS, Mujokoro B, Dorkoosh F,
Khosravani M, Adabi M (2018) Investigation of effective
parameters on size of paclitaxel loaded PLGA nanoparticles.
Adv Pharm Bull 8(1):77
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
52. Zhou L, Duan X, Zeng S et al (2015) Codelivery of SH-aspirin
and curcumin by mPEG-PLGA nanoparticles enhanced
antitumor activity by inducing mitochondrial apoptosis. Int J
Nanomed 5:5205–5218. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S84326
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
53. Manoochehri S, Darvishi B, Kamalinia G et al (2013) Surface
modification of PLGA nanoparticles via human serum
albumin conjugation for controlled delivery of docetaxel.
Daru J Pharm Sci 21:1–10. https://
doi.org/10.1186/2008-2231-21-58
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
54. Tabatabaei Mirakabad FS, Nejati-Koshki K, Akbarzadeh A et
al (2014) PLGA-based nanoparticles as cancer drug delivery
systems. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 15(2):517–535. https://
doi.org/10.7314/APJCP.2014.15.2.517
Article  Google Scholar 

55. Sanna V, Roggio AM, Posadino AM et al (2011) Novel
docetaxel-loaded nanoparticles based on poly (lactide-co-
caprolactone) and poly (lactide-co-glycolide-co-caprolactone)
for prostate cancer treatment: formulation, characterization,
and cytotoxicity studies. Nanoscale Res Lett 6:1–9. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X-6-260
Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
56. Taheri A, Dinarvand R, Atyabi F et al (2011) Enhanced anti-
tumoral activity of methotrexate-human serum albumin
conjugated nanoparticles by targeting with luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) peptide. Int J Mol Sci
12(7):4591–4608. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms12074591
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
57. Taratula O, Garbuzenko OB, Kirkpatrick P et al (2009)
Surface-engineered targeted PPI dendrimer for efficient
intracellular and intratumoral siRNA delivery. J Control
Release 140(3):284–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jconrel.2009.06.019
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
58. Pi C, Zhao W, Zeng M et al (2022) Anti-lung cancer effect of
paclitaxel solid lipid nanoparticles delivery system with
curcumin as co-loading partner in vitro and in vivo. Drug
Deliv 29(1):1878–1891. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10717544.2022.2086938
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
59. Alvi M, Yaqoob A, Rehman K, Shoaib SM, Hamid MS, Alvi A
(2022) PLGA-based nanoparticles for the treatment of cancer:
current strategies and perspectives. AAPS Open 8:12. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s41120-022-00060-7
Article  Google Scholar 
60. Rafiei P, Haddadi A (2017) Docetaxel-loaded PLGA and
PLGA-PEG nanoparticles for intravenous application:

pharmacokinetics and biodistribution profile. Int J Nanomed
27(12):935–947. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S121881
Article  Google Scholar 
61. Koopaei NM, Khoshayand MR, Mostafavi SH, Amini M,
Khorramizadeh MR, Jeddi Tehrani M, Atyabi F, Dinarvand R
(2014) Docetaxel loaded PEG-PLGA nanoparticles: optimized
drug loading, in-vitro cytotoxicity and in-vivo antitumor
effect. Iran J Pharm Res 13(3):819–833
CAS  Google Scholar 
62. Zhang D, Liu L, Wang J, Zhang H, Zhang Z, Xing G, Wang X,
Liu M (2022) Drug-loaded PEG-PLGA nanoparticles for cancer
treatment. Front Pharmacol 13:990505. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.990505
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
63. Dharap S, Wang Y, Chandna P et al (2005) Tumor-specific
targeting of an anticancer drug delivery system by LHRH
peptide. Proc Natl Acad Sci 102(36):12962–12967. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0504274102
Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
64. Giram PS, Nimma R, Bulbule A, Yadav AS, Gorain M,
Radharani NNV, Kundu GC, Garnaik B (2020) Poly(d, l-
lactide-co-glycolide) Surface-anchored biotin-loaded
irinotecan nanoparticles for active targeting of colon cancer.
ACS Omega 9(3):63
Google Scholar 
65. He Z, Huang J, Xu Y et al (2015) Co-delivery of cisplatin and
paclitaxel by folic acid conjugated amphiphilic PEG-PLGA
copolymer nanoparticles for the treatment of non-small lung
cancer. Oncotarget 6(39):42150
Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

Download references
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Department
of Science and Technology, Govt of India, for its funding under DST
Nanomission grant number DST/NM/NB/2018/82(G). We would
also like to acknowledge the infrastructural support under DST FIST
grant number SR/FST/COLLEGE/2021/1172. Further we would like
to acknowledge the support at School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Girijananda Chowdhury University, for the successful completion of
the work.
Funding
This study was funded by DST Nanomission grant number DST/
NM/NB/2018/82(G) by Department of Science and Technology,
Govt of India.
Author information
Authors and Affiliations
1. GIPS, Assam Science and Technology University, Guwahati,
India
Madhuchandra Lahan, Trideep Saikia, Alakesh
Bharali & Bhanu P. Sahu
2. Advanced Drug Delivery Laboratory, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Girijananda Chowdhury University,
Guwahati, India
Madhuchandra Lahan, Trideep Saikia, Alakesh
Bharali & Bhanu P. Sahu
3. Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Department
of Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Gauhati University,
Guwahati, India

Kalpajit Dutta, Rituraj Bharadwaj & Subhash Medhi
4. CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, Jorhat,
India
Rinku Baishya
5. Pharmacology and Toxicology Lab, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Girijananda Chowdhury University, Guwahati, India
Sunayana Baruah
Authors
1. Madhuchandra Lahan
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
2. Trideep Saikia
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
3. Kalpajit Dutta
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
4. Rinku Baishya
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
5. Alakesh Bharali
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
6. Sunayana Baruah
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar

7. Rituraj Bharadwaj
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
8. Subhash Medhi
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
9. Bhanu P. Sahu
View author publications
Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
Contributions
ML was involved in the data curation, formal analysis,
investigation, methodology and roles/writing—original draft; TS
contributed to the investigation and methodology; KD assisted in
the investigation and methodology; RB contributed to the resources,
investigation and methodology; AB contributed to the investigation,
methodology and writing—review and editing; SB was involved in
the investigation, methodology and validation; RB acquired the
funding ; SM contributed to funding acquisition and resources; BPS
performed the conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology,
project administration, resources, software, supervision, validation,
visualization, roles/writing—original draft and writing—review and
editing.
Corresponding author
Correspondence to Bhanu P. Sahu.
Ethics declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The animal study was conducted in accordance with the CPCSEA
guidelines, after obtaining approval from the Institutional Animal

Ethical Committee (Ref no: GIPS/IAEC/PhD/PRO/01/2023) and
Institutional Animal Ethical Committee of Girijananda Chowdhury
University (SPON/PRO/4/2023).
Consent for publication
No personal data of individuals were used in the current study.
Competing interests
The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to
disclose.
Additional information
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary Information
43094_2024_743_MOESM1_ESM.jpg
Supplementary file 1: Fig. S1.Images of the obtained Lung nodule of
mice of different treatment groupsImages of tumor development in
organs other than lung in the Non Treated induced mice group viz
Lung, Spleen, Intestine.
Supplementary file 2: Fig. S2. TNF alpha levels in
mice in anticancer study.
Supplementary file 3: Fig. S3.p53 levels in mice in
anticancer study.
Rights and permissions

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article's Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article's Creative
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/.
Reprints and permissions
About this article
[image]
Cite this article
Lahan, M., Saikia, T., Dutta, K. et al. Multifunctional approach with
LHRH-mediated PLGA nanoconjugate for site-specific codelivery of
curcumin and BCL2 siRNA in mice lung cancer. Futur J Pharm Sci
10, 163 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1186/s43094-024-00743-w
Download citation
•  Received: 05 October 2024
•  Accepted: 06 November 2024
•  Published: 20 November 2024
•  DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s43094-024-00743-w
Share this article

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
content:
Get shareable link
Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.
Copy shareable link to clipboard
Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
Keywords
•  Lung cancer
•  Targeted delivery
•  Curcumin
•  Drug resistance
•  Nanoconjugates
Download PDF
Advertisement
[image]
[image]
•  Support and Contact
•  Jobs
•  Language editing for authors
•  Scientific editing for authors
•  Leave feedback
•  Terms and conditions
•  Privacy statement
•  Accessibility
•  Cookies
Follow SpringerOpen

•  SpringerOpen Twitter page
•  SpringerOpen Facebook page
By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your
US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your
privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre.
[image]
© 2025 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of
Springer Nature.