[image]
[image]
E-ISSN: 2148-6247
About Us
Aims and Scope
Editorial Board
Advisory Board
Instructions to Authors
○  Instructions to Authors
○  Ethical Policy
Contact Us
Evaluation of Biodegradable Microparticles for Mucosal
Vaccination Against Diphtheria Toxoid: Nasal Efficacy Studies in
Guinea Pigs
PDF
Cite
Share
Request
VOLUME: 20 ISSUE: 5
Original Article

P: 294 - 301
October 2023
Evaluation of Biodegradable
Microparticles for Mucosal
Vaccination Against Diphtheria
Toxoid: Nasal Efficacy Studies in
Guinea Pigs
Turk J Pharm Sci 2023;20(5):294-301
DOI: 10.4274/tjps.galenos.2022.05626
Selin ÇOBAN 1
Ongun Mehmet SAKA 2
Asuman BOZKIR 2
Author Information Copyright & Licence Information Galenos
& Turk J Pharm Sci Disclaimer
1. Ankara University, Graduate School of
Health Sciences, Ankara, Türkiye
2. Ankara University Faculty of Pharmacy,
Department of Pharmaceutical Technology,
Ankara, Türkiye

No information available.
No information available
Received Date: 10.10.2022
Accepted Date: 07.12.2022
Publish Date: 07.11.2023
PDF
Cite
Share
Request
ABSTRACT
Conclusion:
Absorbance values of the ELISA test showed that
PLGA- and PCL-bearing microparticles could stimulate
an adequate systemic immune response with intranasal

vaccination. In addition, PLGA and PCL microparticles
resulted in significantly increased IgG titers with
intranasal administration as a booster dose following
subcutaneous administration. PCL polymer elicited a
high immune response compared with PLGA polymer (p
<0.05).
Results:
The average geometric diameter of the particles was
found to be between 7 and 24 µm, which is suitable for
uptake by the antigen-presenting cells in the nasal
mucosa. Although the differences were insignificant, the
PLGA polymer-containing formulations exhibited the
highest encapsulation efficiency. Microparticle
formulations, prepared with both PLGA and PCL
polymers, were successfully produced at high
production yields. The in vitro release profile was
presented as a biexponential process with an initial
burst effect due to the release of the protein adsorbed
on the microsphere surface, and the subsequent
sustained release profile is the result of protein diffusion
through the channels or pores formed in the polymer
matrix. DT-loaded microparticles, DT solution in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and empty
microparticles (control) were administered via nasal
route and subcutaneously to guinea pigs. The antibody
content of each serum sample was determined using an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Materials and Methods:

Antigen-containing microparticles were prepared using
the double emulsion (w/o/w) solvent evaporation
method.
Objectives:
In this study, poly-(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL) and poly-
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microparticles
encapsulating diphtheria toxoid (DT) were investigated
for their potential as a mucosal vaccine delivery system.
Keywords:
Diphtheria toxoid, immunity, intranasal, microparticulate
formulations
INTRODUCTION
The effects of emerging technologies have shown not
only the success of the correlation between vaccination
and immunogenic components of vaccines but also the
effectiveness of delivery systems. Therefore, studies on
an effective vaccine formulation or delivery system are
of great importance for developing modern vaccines.
Most important viral and bacterial infections occur
through mucosal membranes such as the respiratory,
intestinal, tear, or urogenital tracts.1 Adjuvants have
been developed to facilitate and improve the immune
response obtained after mucosal immunization.2
Particulate adjuvants or antigen delivery systems are
considered an alternative to other immune stimulating
adjuvants.3 The concept of a polymeric delivery system

has emerged for targeting specific regions of proteins or
antigens. This approach for developing mucosal vaccine
delivery systems has become mandatory, especially for
protecting proteins against fragmentation of antigens in
the mucosal environment and for increasing their uptake
by the immune system. Polymeric particles are
adsorbed at higher efficiency rates compared with
soluble molecules in mucosal epithelial tissues and
thus, high antigen concentrations are provided in the
area requiring an immune response.4,5 Biodegradable
and biologically compatible polyesters and poly-lactic-
co-glycolics (PLG) are some of the most preferred
polymeric particulate systems because they have been
used in humans for many years on surgical suture
materials, as well as controlled-release drug systems.6
Diphtheria is a bacterial disease caused by a toxin
produced by Corynebacterium diphtheria and causes
clinical symptoms.7 Because the ability to create long-
term immunological memory of the vaccine applied is
parenterally weak, booster doses should be
administered intermittently. Booster vaccination is
recommended as a strategy to reduce the disease’s
health and economic burden in these populations.8 The
reason for not providing a formation of permanent
immunological memory is thought to arise from the
inability to stimulate local humoral immunity in the
respiratory tract.9,10 Because mucosal immunization
stimulates both systemic and mucosal immunity, it is
considered an alternative route to parenteral
administration. In addition, side effects are minimized
with the application of mucosal vaccines, which is an

easier route than the parenteral route. Therefore,
mucosal immunization holds notable importance when
the vaccination needs to be repeated at certain
intervals, as in diphtheria.11 The nasal mucosa is an
important part of the mucosal immune system. It is the
first point of contact for antigens inhaled into the
organism. Thus, pathogen neutralization occurs at the
first point at which pathogens enter the organism with
nasal vaccination. As a result, both systemic and
mucosal immune responses could be accomplished.7,12
Recent studies have shown that the nasal route is more
sufficient for the systemic transport of low-molecular-
weight polar drugs, peptides, and proteins than the
mucosal delivery routes. Traditional drugs applied
nasally are used for treating local diseases such as
nasal allergy, nasal congestion, and nasal infection.13,14
The purpose of this study was to develop
microparticulate vaccine systems against diphtheria with
long-term immunological memory. One of our main
objectives was to eliminate repetitive doses to improve
patient comfort. In addition, alternative intranasal
administration was studied instead of parenteral root,
which is more difficult and painful.
MATERIALS AND
METHODS

RESULTS
DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to develop
microparticulate systems containing diphtheria toxoid as
the model antigen and to evaluate their intranasal
administration. New approaches to diphtheria
vaccination that generate immune responses equal to or
surpass those generated by traditional vaccines must
have an increased safety profile. In this study, we
selected mucosal vaccination because of capacity to
stimulate both systemic and mucosal immune
responses. It has been shown that using the nasal
route, most soluble antigens can induce immune
responses.11 Conversely, it should not be ignored that
these antigens can induce poor immunogenicity with
immunological tolerance.1,2,3 In our previous study, we
found that nasal administration of diphtheria toxoid
alone induces very weak immune responses.27 In
contrast, the use of polymeric-DT microparticulate
formulations considerably enhance their immunogenicity
for intranasal immunization of guinea pigs. These
microparticulated formulations containing diphtheria
toxoid were prepared using the double emulsion (w/o/w)
solvent evaporation method. PLGA and PCL polymers
were used in microparticulate formulations because of
their biodegradable and biocompatible properties.
Furthermore, recent studies have shown that PLGA

copolymers significantly affect the stability and
biological activities of active substances, especially
depending on the hydrophobicity of the polymer and the
presence of acidic degradation products.28
Sayin et al.19 established that chitosan can enhance
immune responses via the nasal route. They studied
medium molecular weight chitosan, which could
successfully enhance the absorption of diphtheria toxoid
nasally in rat models. In the nasal cavity, biodegradable
chitosan increases the residence of the antigen and can
open tight junctions between the cells, thereby
promoting absorption into the nasal cells.19 On the other
hand, organic solvent residues in the formulation, while
preparing chitosan solutions can cause the lower
stability of these molecules against proteolysis and
lower absorption when administered intranasally.9 We
also used similar organic solvents while preparing
microsphere formulations. However, in order to remove
the organic solvent residue, during the preparation step,
the solvent was allowed to evaporate overnight under
pressure, and the washing procedure was applied under
high-speed centrifugation three times. The
encapsulation yields and immune response of the
formulations show that we eliminated this negative
condition.
Isaka et al.7 previously demonstrated that immunization
of mice with alum-adsorbed DT was considerably
enhanced by booster immunization via the same route.
Immunization of the mice in this way generated similar
IgG and neutralizing antibody titers in parenterally

immunized mice, and generated high levels of local
IgA.10 The development of an alternative
microparticulate formulation for mucosally delivered
diphtheria toxoid booster vaccines may eliminate some
of the side effects associated with the conventional
vaccine with aluminium salts and may also be more
acceptable for frequent boosting against diphtheria.
Similar results were obtained using our previous in situ
gel formulations.27 When the release kinetics were
compared, it was shown that the microsphere
formulation was more effective than the in situ gel
formulations. In addition, it is one step ahead of other
formulation designs because of the adjuvant effect of
the PCL polymer, which is used for microsphere
formulations.
The morphological properties, particle size,
encapsulation efficiency, and production yield of
microparticles were investigated during pre-formulation
studies. According to the obtained results, formulations
were optimized and certain amounts of diphtheria toxoid
were added to the formulations (D1, D2, D3, D4, D5,
and D6). For these formulations; morphological
properties, particle size, and distribution, encapsulation
efficiencies, production yields, drug release profiles, and
stability of microparticles were investigated.
Formulations coded D1 and D5 were considered to be
superior to other formulations given in the in vitro tests
(e.g., encapsulation efficiencies, particle size and
distribution, particle size and distribution). Therefore,
these formulations were tested in guinea pigs to
determine immune responses that would be produced

following intranasal and subcutaneous administration.
Absorbance values of the ELISA test showed that
formulations coded D1 and D5 could stimulate adequate
systemic immune response with intranasal vaccination.
Additionally, D1 and D5 formulations exhibited a
significant increment in IgG titers with intranasal
administration as a booster dose following
subcutaneous administration. PCL polymer elicited a
high immune response compared with PLGA polymer (p
<0.05). However, the PCL polymer, when used alone,
was also found to have an adjuvant effect.
In this study, we developed intranasal vaccines as an
alternative to parenteral formulations. Therefore, it was
investigated for any inflammation, edema, or other side
effects that occurred in the injection and nasal area for
all guinea pigs within 42 days. The absence of adverse
effects was also positive for our formulations for
mucosal administration.
In our previous study, in situ gel formulations improved
the residence time of the diphtheria toxoid in the
mucosa for its therapeutic efficacy.27 Although these gel
formulations can be applied easily by droplet into
intranasal way, both Kruskal-Wallis and Wilcoxon tests
indicated that the microparticulated formulation (D1 and
D5) resulted in an increased systemic immune response
according to the in situ gel formulation (F3 and F7). This
may have been caused by the late migration of DT in
gel formulations.

CONCLUSION
This study demonstrates that microparticles of PCL and
PLGA encapsulated with diphtheria toxoid can be
produced using a modified double emulsion (w/o/w)
technique. The morphology, size, and distribution of
particles, encapsulation, production efficiency, and in
vitro release of the formulations were investigated, and
two candidate formulations were applied to the nostrils
of male guinea pigs.
The immune response of formulations applied through
the intranasal route was higher in groups, in which the
subcutaneous injection followed the intranasal
application. This finding supports the recommendation
of WHO to encourage mucosal immunization with
diseases that affect the upper respiratory tract, such as
diphtheria.
The biodegradable property of the PLC polymer, its
hydrophobicity, and its resistance to acidicu pH
indicated make this delivery system a potential carrier
for mucosal intranasal vaccines. Compared with PLGA
microparticles loaded with the same amount of toxoid,
this hydrophobic polymer (PCL) has a high immune
response. In addition, PCL formulations without
diphtheria toxoid have an immune response because of
their adjuvant effect.
Materials

Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA, 50:50) was obtained
from Boehringer Ingelheim. Poli-(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL,
M.A. 14 Kda) was purchased from Sigma. Polyvinyl
alcohol (PVA; 87-89% hydrolyzed, molecular weight
13,000-23,000) was purchased from Aldrich Chemical
Company (USA). Diphtheria toxoid (800 Lf/ampoule,
Japanese Lot) was provided by the Refik Saydam
National Public Health Agency (Türkiye) as a standard.
Dichloromethane (DCM) was purchased from Sigma-
Aldrich (Germany). The other agents were all special
reagent grade.
Preparation of the DT-loaded microparticles
Microparticles were prepared by double emulsion-
solvent evaporation technique as follows:15 250 µL of
diphtheria toxoid in ultrapure water was emulsified with
2.5 mL of 5% (w/v) PLGA or 5% (w/v) PCL in DCM
using an Ultraturrax model T 25 (IKA Laboratory
Technology, Staufen, Germany) at 8,000 rpm for 5 min
or Sonicator model Sonopuls HD 2070 (Bandelin
Electronics GmbH&Co, Germany) at 60 W for 30 s. The
resulting water-in-oil emulsion (2.5 mL) was then
emulsified at 8,000 rpm for 5 min in a Eurostar
mechanical stirrer (IKA Laboratory Technology, Staufen,
Germany) with 50 mL of 5% (w/v) polyvinyl alcohol to
produce a water-in-oil-in-water emulsion. This emulsion
was stirred magnetically overnight under pressure at
room temperature to allow evaporation of the organic
solvent and the formation of microparticles.
Microparticles were isolated by centrifugation (10 min at
4,000 x g), washed three times in 10 mL of ultrapure

water, and freeze-dried. The prepared formulations are
given in Table 1.
Characterization and quantification of DT-loaded
microparticles
Particle appearance and particle size analysis
Photomicrographs of microparticles were taken using a
Leica DM 4000B microscope. Lyophilized microparticles
were dispersed in purified water and analyzed using
(Sympatec Helos H0728) particle size analyzer.
The surface morphologies of the microspheres were
also observed using an environmental scanning
electron microscope (ESEM) (FEI Quanta Model 200
FEG, Tokyo, Japan). A small aliquot of the
microspheres was mounted onto metal stubs using
double-sided adhesive tape for sample preparation.
After being vacuum coated with a thin layer (100-150
A°) of gold, the microspheres were examined by ESEM
operated at 5 kV accelerating voltage. The
photomicrographs were then taken at a magnification of
10,000.
In vitro release of protein from PLGA and PCL
microparticles
In vitro drug release was determined by the statical
method.16 Microparticles were suspended in pH 7.4
PBS contain 0.01% NaN3. The samples were retained
in a water bath at 37 °C and shook at 40 rpm. At

appropriate time intervals, the release medium was
completely withdrawn after centrifugation at 7,500 rpm
and replaced with fresh buffer. The diphtheria toxoid
concentration in the supernatant was determined by the
mBCA technique. In addition, all release data (n: 3)
were calculated (with SPSS) according to the
percentage released amount of diphtheria toxoid to
determine the release kinetics.
Diphtheria toxoid loading in microparticles
The protein contents of the microparticles were assayed
by the digestion technique. For this technique, a NaOH/
SDS solution (1 N NaOH, 5% w/v SDS) was added to
the microparticles and dissolved.3 The mixture was
neutralized with 1 N HCl and centrifuged. The diphtheria
toxoid content was determined using the
microbicinchoninic acid (mBCA) (Molecular Devices,
SPECTRAmax 190 pc) total protein assay at 560 nm.
Stability studies
D1 and D5 formulations were stored in a refrigerator at
2-8 °C and in a climate cabinet at 25 ± 2 °C, 60 ± 5%
relative humidity for 3 months. The diphtheria toxoid
content was determined by mBCA assay. At the end of
3 months, non-reduced-PAGE analysis was performed
to understand whether the protein integrity of the
diphtheria toxoid was preserved.
Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis

Diphtheria toxoid calibration samples and formulations
that remained at 2-8 °C for three months were
subjected to PAGE gel under non-reducing conditions
using an electrophoresis system. Samples and
reference materials for diphtheria toxoid were run on
discontinuous gels prepared by stacking and separating
in a sample buffer.
Immunization studies
The immunization program we followed included
intranasal vaccination and triple repeat blood sample
collection from animals; thus, guinea pig was selected
as the most suitable experimental animal, and ethical
approval was obtained from the Refik Saydam
Hıfzıssıhha Center Presidency Scientific Committee and
the Ethics Committee (06.01.2011/14886). For in vivo
studies, weights ranging from 300 to 350 g of 54 male
albino guinea pigs (7-8 years old) were used. The
morphology of the D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, and D6 coded
formulations, the sizes and distribution of particles, the
encapsulation and production efficiency, and in vitro
release results were considered. For the application of
D1 and D5 coded formulations, in vivo studies were
conducted. In the control group, diphtheria toxoid with
PBS (pH 7.4) was preferred.
Many formulations containing diphtheria toxoids are
25-30 Lf in the first vaccination and booster dose
application for the pediatric population, whereas it
contains 2 Lf and above diphtheria toxoids for adults.17
A formulation of 25 Lf/50 µL (25 µL/nostril) was applied

to the nostrils of male guinea pigs using a micropipette
without using anesthetics for intranasal vaccination.18
With the application to both nostrils, the membrane area
and, thus the absorption of formulations were aimed to
increase. Guinea pigs were kept still for approximately 2
min to avoid any loss after administration of the vaccine
into the nose. For subcutaneous vaccination, 25 Lf/500
µL of formulation was injected into male guinea pigs
without anesthetics.
For in vivo studies, formulations containing diphtheria
toxoid were applied in certain ways and days to nine
groups (n: 6) of male guinea pigs (Table 2). To obtain
information about whether the experimental animals had
ever experienced diphtheria toxoid or not, blood
samples were taken from each animal a week before
the first vaccination. In this way, exposure to stress
conditions of experimental animals was prevented and
the best response after immunization was aimed to be
obtained. To determine the changes in immune
responses of guinea pigs, 1 mL of blood samples from
each one was taken from their hearts, when
immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgG antibody formation took
place on the 20th and 42nd days.19 During blood
collection, guinea pigs were anesthetized with ketamine
(35 mg/kg) and xylazine (5 mg/kg). The collected blood
samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min after
waiting 1 h at room temperature and then another 1 h in
the refrigerator (2-8 °C). The serum samples were
collected from the supernatant and kept at -20 °C
before analysis. Immune responses in collected serum
samples were evaluated using an ELISA kit (total IgG

guinea pig).
Anti-DT antibody assays
DT-specific IgG antibodies were measured by ELISA.
The immunization chart is given in Table 2. In this
assay, the IgG in the sample reacts with the anti-IgG
antibodies that have been adsorbed on the surface of
polystyrene microtiter wells. After removing unbound
proteins by washing, anti-IgG antibodies conjugated
with horseradish peroxidase were added. These
enzyme-labeled antibodies form complexes with
previously bound IgG. Following another washing step,
the enzyme bound to the immunosorbent is assayed by
adding a chromogenic substrate, 3,3’,5,5’-
tetramethylbenzidine (TMB). The quantity of bound
enzyme varies directly with the concentration of IgG in
the tested sample; thus, the absorbance at 450 nm is a
measure of the concentration of IgG in the test sample.
The quantity of IgG in the test sample can be
interpolated from the standard curve constructed from
the standards and corrected for sample dilution.
Preparation and characterization of DT-loaded PCL
and PLGA microparticles
The microparticles prepared using the w/o/w solvent
evaporation method had a regular morphology and a
smooth surface. The particle size of the formulations
was between 7 and 34 µm (Figure 1). D5 formulation
was also observed under scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) with a smooth spherical shape (Figure 2).

DT loading
DT-loaded microparticles were prepared using different
polymers (PCL and PLGA) by variation in the weight of
the polymer dissolved in DCM to investigate the
eventual modifications of the particle size, protein
loading, and efficiency of entrapment (Table 3). It was
indicated that the type of polymer used also affected the
encapsulation efficiency. It was determined that
formulations prepared with PLGA polymer showed
higher encapsulation efficiency than those prepared
with PCL polymer.20,21
Stability studies
D1 and D5 formulations were stored for 3 months at 2-8
°C and 25 ± 2 °C (60 ± 5% RH). Bands of digestion and
calibration samples were obtained as shown in Figure 3.
According to the bands of integrity, we can conclude
that diphtheria toxoids maintained their stability during
the formulation process. The number of changes during
stability studies under different conditions for the active
substance and encapsulated DT are given in Table 4.
To examine the stability of diphtheria toxoid, it was kept
in refrigerated conditions for multiple months. It has
been stated that DT remains stable for years when
stored at 2-8 °C.22
PAGE electrophoresis
In our previous study, the structural integrity of the

diphtheria toxin was analyzed by Sodium dodecyl-
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-
PAGE). Our standard diphtheria toxin has a broad band
around 66 kDa, with two fragments (A fragment around
45 kDa, and B fragment around 29 kDa). Preservation
of the integrity and stability of the diphtheria toxin in 3
months under both conditions did not show any
significant differences in the non-denaturing
environment (p >0.05). Samples extracted from
microparticles under both stability conditions were
applied to the polyacrylamide gel under non-denaturing
conditions (Figure 3). There was only one band around
66 kDa. This shows that the antigen encapsulated in the
formulations remains intact.
In vitro release studies
Rapid drug release from polymeric particles, called
“burst release” were examined in all formulations
(Figure 4). This rapid initial release is attributed to the
fraction of the drug adsorbed or weakly bound to the
surface of the microspheres. Similar to our previous
investigation, we obtained triphasic release profiles
generally found in formulations prepared with PLGA and
PCL polymers.23,24 It was observed that D1 and D2
coded formulations prepared with the PLGA polymer
had a faster release than those prepared with PCL
polymers. At the end of five weeks, the PLGA polymer
used formulation released all active ingredients. On the
other hand, PCL formulations (coded as D3, D4, D5,
and D6) could not release all the active ingredients in 5
weeks. In addition, previous studies have revealed that

the release rates of particulate systems prepared with
PLGA are higher than those of particulate systems
prepared with PCL.25 Furthermore, all of the prepared
formulations were compatible with the Higuchi kinetics,
which is an expected outcome in matrix systems. In
addition, silver staining electrophoresis was applied to in
vitro release samples, and no extra band formation was
observed (data not shown). The obtained single band
indicates that the structural integrity of the diphtheria
toxoid is preserved during microparticle formation.
Immunization studies
The first vaccination experiment was performed to
investigate, whether DT-loaded microparticles can
induce a systemic immune response following nasal
administration to guinea pigs. The results of guinea pig
serum antibody (IU/milliliter) are summarized in Figure
5.
By comparing the groups of F2 and F4, the formulation
coded D1 increased the IgG titer on the 42nd day, when
administered intranasally. When the IgG titers of group
F6 were examined, increased concentrations were
observed after intranasal application. Although this
group first applied subcutaneously, continuous
intranasal administration showed increased titers.
According to these results, we concluded that
formulation D1 can be a good candidate for a booster
(rappel) formulation.
When the groups of F3 and F5 were compared, D5

formulation administered intranasally was found to have
an increment effect on the IgG titer on the 42nd day.
When the blood concentrations of group F7 were
examined, similar increasing titers were observed as
formulation D1.
When D1- and D5-coded formulations were compared
with each other, D5-coded formulation was observed to
stimulate antibody formation stronger than the D1-
coded formulation, and the difference was statistically
evaluated by the t-test and was determined to be
significant (p <0.05). The reason is a result of the PCL
polymer. In the formulation in which PCL polymer alone
is applied intranasally (group F3), there is a significant
increase in immune response obtained from the F1
group. This increase in IgG is thought to play an active
role in the stimulation of systems forming the immune
response of PCL polymer. Murillo et al. observed the
same adjuvant effect, when they applied the PCL
polymer to animals in vivo.26 However, we concluded
that the PLGA polymer did not show an adjuvant effect
with nasal application.
The immune response of the F4 and F5 groups in which
only intranasal application was performed was higher
than those of the F6 and F7 groups in which
subcutaneous injection followed intranasal application.
In the first and second immunizations, the reason why
the immune response obtained after intranasal
application is higher than the others is thought to be
from a disease that maintains the upper respiratory
tract. This finding supports the request of World Health

Organization (WHO) to encourage mucosal
immunization with diseases that affect the upper
respiratory tract like diphtheria.22
References
1
Sharma S, Mukkur TK, Benson HA, Chen Y.
Pharmaceutical aspects of intranasal delivery of
vaccines using particulate systems. J Pharm Sci.
2009;98:812-843.
2
Freytag LC, Clements JD. Mucosal adjuvants. Vaccine.
2005;23:1804-1813.
3
O’Hagan DT, MacKichan ML, Singh M. Recent
developments in adjuvants for vaccines against
infectious diseases. Biomol Eng. 2001;18:69-85.
4
Zeinoddini M, Azizi A, Bayat S, Tavasoli Z, localized
surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) detection of
diphtheria toxoid using gold nanoparticlemonoclonal
antibody conjugates. Plasmonics. 2018;13:583-590.
5
Andrianov AK, Payne LG. Polymeric carriers for oral
uptake of microparticulates. Adv Drug Deliv Rev.
1998;34:155-170.
6

O’Hagan DT, Ott GS, Van Nest G. Recent advances in
vaccine adjuvants: the development of MF59 emulsion
and polymeric microparticles. Mol Med Today.
1997;3:69-75.
7
Isaka M, Yasuda Y, Kozuka S, Taniguchi T, Matano K,
Maeyama J, Komiya T, Ohkuma K, Goto N, Tochikubo
K. Induction of systemic and mucosal antibody
responses in mice immunized intranasally with
aluminium-non-adsorbed diphtheria toxoid together with
recombinant cholera toxin B subunit as an adjuvant.
Vaccine. 1999;18:743-751.
8
McCormack PL. Reduced-antigen, combined diphtheria,
tetanus and acellular pertussis vaccine, adsorbed
(Boostrix®): a review of its properties and use as a
single-dose booster immunization. Drugs.
2012;72:1765-1791.
9
Aguila A, Donachie AM, Peyre M, McSharry CP,
Sesardic D, Mowat AM. Induction of protective and
mucosal immunity against diphtheria by a immune
stimulating complex (ISCOMS) based vaccine. Vaccine.
2006;24:5201-5210.
10
Woo HS, Kim SR, Yoon M, Lee ES, Chang IH, Whang
YM, Lee DI, Kang MJ, Choi YW. Combined poly(lactide-
co-glycolide) microspheres containing diphtheria toxoid
for a single-shot immunization. AAPS PharmSciTech.
2018;19:1160-1167.

11
McNeela EA, O’Connor D, Jabbal-Gill I, Illum L, Davis
SS, Pizza M, Peppoloni S, Rappuoli R, Mills KH. A
mucosal vaccine against diphtheria: formulation of cross
reacting material (CRM(197)) of diphtheria toxin with
chitosan enhances local and systemic antibody and Th2
responses following nasal delivery. Vaccine.
2000;19:1188-1198.
12
Saatci F, Bozkir A. Application of nasal vaccines. J Fac
Pharm. 2003;32:175-193.
13
Du G, Leone M, Romeijn S, Kersten G, Jiskoot W,
Bouwstra JA. Immunogenicity of diphtheria toxoid and
poly(I:C) loaded cationic liposomes after hollow
microneedle-mediated intradermal injection in mice. Int
J Pharm. 2018;547:250-257.
14
Illum L. Nasal drug delivery-possibilities, problems and
solutions. J Control Release. 2003;87:187-198.
15
Baras B, Benoit MA, Dupré L, Poulain-Godefroy O,
Schacht AM, Capron A, Gillard J, Riveau G. Single-
dose mucosal immunization with biodegradable
microparticles containing a Schistosoma mansoni
antigen. Infect Immun. 1999;67:2643-2648.
16
Florindo HF, Pandit S, Lacerda L, Gonçalves LM, Alpar
HO, Almeida AJ. The enhancement of the immune
response against S. equi antigens through the

intranasal administration of poly-epsilon-caprolactone-
based nanoparticles. Biomaterials. 2009;30:879-891.
17
Ciofi degli Atti ML, Salmaso S, Cotter B, Gallo G,
Alfarone G, Pinto A, Bella A, von Hunolstein C.
Reactogenicity and immunogenicity of adult versus
paediatric diphtheria and tetanus booster dose at 6
years of age. Vaccine. 2001;20:74-79.
18
Alpar HO, Somavarapu S, Atuah KN, Bramwell VW.
Biodegradable mucoadhesive particulates for nasal and
pulmonary antigen and DNA delivery. Adv Drug Deliv
Rev. 2005;57:411-430.
19
Sayin B, Somavarapu S, Li XW, Thanou M, Sesardic D,
Alpar HO, Senel S. Mono-N-carboxymethyl chitosan
(MCC) and N-trimethyl chitosan (TMC) nanoparticles for
non-invasive vaccine delivery. Int J Pharm.
2008;363:139-148.
20
Peracchia MT, Gref R, Minamitake Y, Domb A, Lotan N,
Langer R. PEG-coated nanospheres from amphiphilic
diblock and multiblock copolymers: investigation of their
drug encapsulation and release characteristics. J
Control Release. 1997;46:223-231.
21
Estevan M, Gamazo C, Grilló MJ, Del Barrio GG,
Blasco JM, Irache JM. Experiments on a sub-unit
vaccine encapsulated in microparticles and its efficacy
against Brucella melitensis in mice. Vaccine.

2006;24:4179-4187.
22
W.H.O. WHO, Making a difference in people’s lifes, the
double burden: emerging epidemics and persistent
problems, Geneva, Switzerland, WHO Press. World
Health Report. 1999;13-29.
23
Lao LL, Venkatraman SS, Peppas NA. Modeling of drug
release from biodegradable polymer blends. Eur J
Pharm Biopharm. 2008;70:796-803.
24
Dong CM, Guo YZ, Qiu KY, Gu ZW, Feng XD. In vitro
degradation and controlled release behavior of D,L-
PLGA50 and PCL-b-D,L-PLGA50 copolymer
microspheres. J Control Release. 2005;107:53-64.
25
Lamprecht A, Ubrich N, Hombreiro Pérez M, Lehr C,
Hoffman M, Maincent P. Biodegradable monodispersed
nanoparticles prepared by pressure homogenization-
emulsification. Int J Pharm. 1999;184:97-105.
26
Murillo M, Goñi MM, Irache JM, Arangoa MA, Blasco
JM, Gamazo C. Modulation of the cellular immune
response after oral or subcutaneous immunization with
microparticles containing Brucella ovis antigens. J
Control Release. 2002;85:237-246.
27
Ozbilgin ND, Saka OM, Bozkır A. Preparation and in
vitro/in vivo evaluation of mucosal adjuvant in situ
forming gels with diphtheria toxoid. Drug Deliv.

2014;21:140-147.
[image]
[image]
2024 ©️ Galenos Publishing House