Chandra Mouli Pandey ab, Aditya Sharma a, Gajjala Sumana *a, Ida Tiwari b and Bansi Dhar Malhotra *ac aBiomedical Instrumentation Section, National Physical Laboratory (Council of Scientific & Industrial Research), New Delhi-110012, India. E-mail: sumanagajjala@gmail.com; Fax: +91-11-45609312; Tel: +91-11-45609152 bDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005, India cDepartment of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University, Delhi 110042, India. E-mail: bansi.malhotra@gmail.com; Fax: +91-11-27871023; Tel: +91-11-27871043

First published on 12th February 2013

Herein, we envisage the possibility of preparing stable cationic poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microspheres encapsulating the iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs; 8–12 nm). The IONPs are incorporated into PLGA in organic phase followed by microsphere formation and chitosan coating in aqueous medium via nano-emulsion technique. The average size of the microspheres, as determined by dynamic light scattering are about 310 nm, while the zeta potential for the composite remains near 35 mV at pH 4.0. These microspheres are electrophoretically deposited onto indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate used as cathode and parallel platinum plate as the counter electrode. This platform is utilized to fabricate a DNA biosensor, by immobilizing a probe sequence specific to Escherichia coli. The bioelectrode shows a surface-controlled electrode reaction with the electron transfer coefficient (α) of 0.64 and charge transfer rate constant (ks) of 61.73 s−1. Under the optimal conditions, this biosensor shows a detection limit of 8.7 × 10−14 M and is found to retain about 81% of the initial activity after 9 cycles of use.

The surface charge of nanoparticles imparts an important effect on their interaction with the biological molecules. Positively charged nanoparticles are reported to allow a higher extent of immobilization, apparently as a result of the ionic interactions established between the particles and anion-rich biomolecules.12 PLGA-coated nanoparticles exhibit negative charge that can be shifted to neutral or positive charges by surface modification.11,13 Herein, we explore the possibility of preparing a stable aqueous suspension of PLGA–IONPs microspheres with chitosan (Ch) coating by a nano-emulsion technique. The process involves the formation of a conventional oil-in-water emulsion which consists of an oil phase containing a partially water-miscible solvent, PLGA and IONPs, and an aqueous phase containing Ch. The presence of amino groups in Ch helps in stabilizing the microspheres, which are otherwise unstable as reported in literature.14–16

For biosensing application, a precise control over the spatial arrangement and distribution of the nanoparticles onto the substrate is utmost important.17 Among the various techniques, electrophoretic deposition (EPD) offers rapid deposition of desired materials and their composites with a simple design setup, thereby presenting a scope as an automated and continuous process on an industrial scale.18 It provides tunable control over the degree of deposition of the charged colloidal particles onto an electrode surface under the influence of an applied electric field. Recent studies highlight the importance of pH change at the electrode surface and demonstrate the possibility of EPD using pH-dependent additives.19 Chitosan is one of the most studied polymers owing to its pH-responsive behaviour and excellent adhesive property. Under acidic conditions, protonation of the amine groups of this polymer provide effective charge to the colloids necessary to impart a high degree of solubility in polar solvents, such as water and ethanol, through electrostatic stabilization. However, on application of the requisite potential, the repulsion is reduced at the electrode surface, wherein particles coagulate to form a film.18,19 Zeta potential analysis reveals that the prepared microspheres are positively charged at pH 4.0, which enables their cathodic electro-deposition onto an ITO-coated glass electrode. Subsequently, this microspheres-based platform has been utilized for the fabrication of nucleic acid biosensor by covalent immobilization of the Escherichia coli specific amine-terminated DNA as the capture probe. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been used for the transduction of the hybridization reaction with complementary target sequence specific to E. coli (O157:H7), single-base mismatch, and non-complementary sequences, to investigate the response characteristics of this nucleic acid sensor. To the best of our knowledge, the present work is the first report employing utilization of cationic PLGA microspheres encapsulating IONPs for biosensing application.

The TEM image (Fig. 1; panel i) shows that the oleic acid-capped IONPs are mono-dispersed and nearly spherical in shape having a particle size of 8–12 nm. The results of XRD studies (Fig. 1; panel ii), show the prominent diffraction peaks at (220), (311), (400), (511), and (440) with a spinal structure corresponding to Fe3O4 or γ-Fe2O3 having a face centred cubic crystal lattice (JCPDS no: 87-0245).26 Except for the broadening of the peaks, all the position and relative intensity of diffraction peaks are identical with the standard spectrum for bulk magnetite. Fig. 1 (panel iii) shows the TEM image of the synthesized PLGA–IONPs in which the IONPs are slightly aggregated within the PLGA microspheres, which may perhaps be due to evaporation of the particles on the TEM grid. It can be seen that when these PLGA–IONPs are treated with Ch in aqueous phase, there is formation of a polymer layer of about 10 nm around the surface of the PLGA–IONPs (Fig. 1; panel iv). The average size of formed PlgNPs is about 310 nm with a polydispersity index of ∼0.4 as can be seen from the results of DLS measurements (Fig. 2; panel i). It has been reported that factors like the size of the vials that are used for making the emulsions, sonication intensity, the position of the sonicator head in the solution, and the duration of sonication, influence the size of the microspheres. In general, longer sonication times and higher sonication powers may result in the formation of smaller spheres.22 To determine the particle stability, zeta potential measurements have been conducted as a function of pH at 25 °C, indicating the isoelectric point of the PlgNPs to be 7.3 (Fig. 2; panel ii). At pH values sufficiently different from the isoelectric point, the particles are stabilized by electrostatic repulsions. Further, the zeta potential measurements reveal that the complex is positively charged with a zeta potential of about 35 mV at the pH value of 4.0, indicating the stability of this composite at this pH (Fig. 2; inset panel ii).

FTIR spectroscopic analysis has been carried out to characterize the capping of organic oleate in the synthesized IONPs and the formation of PLGA–IONP composites. As shown in Fig. 3 (curve i), the wide band in the range of 3130–3630 cm−1 is assigned to O–H vibrations. The characteristic absorption peak of Fe–O is observed at 583 cm−1. The sharp bands seen at 2924 and 2854 cm−1 are attributed to asymmetric and symmetric C–H vibrations of the methylene groups. The band at 1642 and 1446 cm−1 can be ascribed to the asymmetric and symmetric COO− stretching, respectively.27,28 Based on the FTIR spectrum, it is interpreted that oleic acid has perhaps capped the surface of the IONPs. In the Ch spectrum, the bands at 1653 and 1594 cm−1 (curve ii) are due to the presence of amide I and II groups, respectively.16 The band at about 1457 cm−1 in the spectrum of the PLGA–IONPs (curve iii), assigned to the symmetric CH2 bending vibration, is found to be shifted to a lower wavenumber (1452 cm−1) in the spectrum of PlgNPs (curve iv) which may be due to the change in conformation of CH2OH at C-6 position. Further, the peak at 1188 cm−1 (curve iv) is attributed to the C–O–C stretch vibration, which arises due to both the bands at 1193 cm−1 in the spectrum of the PLGA–IONPs (curve iii) and 1153 cm−1 in the spectrum of the Ch (curve ii).

Contact angle studies have been carried out to characterize the immobilization of pDNA onto the PlgNPs/ITO electrode. The CA value of the PlgNPs/ITO electrode is found to be 49.34° (Fig. S1; panel i†), which decreases with increased DNA immobilization. This may be assigned to the enhanced hydrophilicity of the electrode surface after DNA immobilization owing to the presence of the phosphodiester backbone of DNA. The CA measurements were monitored at a regular time interval (1 h), and reveal that the bioelectrode reaches a constant value of 27.39° (Fig. S1; panel ii†) after about 5 h (Fig. S1; panel iii†), indicating that the complete immobilization of the probe has occurred. However, it may be noted that the CA value does not approach 0° after DNA immobilization, which may be due to the presence of the aromatic ring structure of nitrogenous bases present in the nucleic acid.

SEM images of the PlgNPs/ITO electrode (Fig. 4; panel i and ii) indicate the presence of the well-isolated microspheres of PlgNPs, with a mean diameter of about 300 nm. This reveals that during electro-deposition, the PlgNPs do not agglomerate and maintain their spherical shape as the formation of clusters is not observed throughout the electrode surface. However, after incubation of the PlgNPs/ITO electrode with pDNA, the observed variation in morphology may be correlated to the immobilization of pDNA (Fig. 4; panel iii and iv).

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic analysis after various stages of chemical functionalization, to extract circuit element parameters for the Randles model is depicted in Fig. 5. The interfacial layer at the working electrode is represented by the parallel combination of resistance, which models charge transfer across the functionalized layer, and capacitance Cdl, which accounts for the electrical double layer that is formed at the interface. The series impedance Zw is the standard Warburg term that describes concentration depletion of the redox species near the interface. EIS measures Zreversus Zim that can be plotted as a Nyquist diagram which typically exhibits two important regions for a reversible reaction at a solid interface. As indicated in the sketch, the semicircle obtained at high modulation frequency describes the Faradic electron-transfer process at the electrode, whereas the straight region obtained for the lower modulation frequency contains information about the diffusion-limited transport of the redox species in the electrolyte to the electrode interface. We have utilized the semicircle diameter to observe the change of electronic transfer resistance (RCT). After electrophoretic deposition of PlgNPs onto the ITO surface, an RCT value for the PlgNPs/ITO electrode is obtained as 0.7 kΩ (curve i). When the pDNA is immobilized on the electrode surface, the electron-transfer by the negatively charged redox marker, [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−, is hindered resulting in an increased RCT (1.1 kΩ, curve ii) as compared to that of the PlgNPs/ITO electrode.

The results of cyclic voltammetric studies obtained as a function of scan rate (υ, 10–300 mV s−1) for the pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO electrode are shown in Fig. S2.† The positive and negative peaks correspond to the oxidation and reduction reactions of the [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− redox pair, respectively. The peak currents Ip for both oxidation and reduction follow a linear relation with respect to the square root of scan rate (Fig. S2; inset i†) indicating the existence of diffusion-controlled electrochemical reaction rates for the redox pair at the electrode. It can be seen that the oxidation peak shifts to a more positive value and the reduction peak to more negative values with increase of the scan rate and both the peak potentials are linearly dependent on the log of the scan rate (Fig. S2; inset ii†), which agrees well with Laviron's theory29 and may be given as:

For comparison, control experiments have been carried out using the pDNA/Ch–IONPs/ITO bioelectrode and the values obtained are given in Table 1. The improved kinetics of pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO compared to that of the pDNA/Ch–IONPs/ITO bioelectrode may perhaps be due to better dispersion of IONPs in PlgNPs than in pristine chitosan. This uniform distribution may be attributed to the fact that carboxylate and hydroxyl terminal groups of PLGA have strong coordination with the surface of the IONPs.9–11 However, in the Ch–IONPs composite, the IONPs are dispersed merely due to electrostatic interactions, resulting in the entrapment of IONPs within the polymer matrix.

The DNA hybridization on the modified electrode has been verified by EIS, which is known to be very sensitive to changes in interfacial impedance upon bio-recognition events occurring at the surface/electrolyte interface.34 As mentioned earlier, when pDNA is immobilized onto the PlgNPs/ITO electrode, an increase in RCT value is observed which may be due to the negatively charged phosphate backbone of pDNA exposed to the electrolyte, which in turn perhaps repel [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−. When the pDNA is incubated with its complementary target DNA sequence (cDNA), the hybridization reaction occurs and more negatively charged phosphate backbones are introduced, hence the RCT value increases following the formation of double-stranded DNA (Fig. 5, curve iii). It can thus be inferred that with a change in negative-charge and conformation transition, there is a change in the interfacial properties. With increase of the cDNA concentration, the RCT value increases correspondingly (Fig. 6, curve ix–i). The difference between the value of RCT for the pDNA immobilized electrode and after hybridization with cDNA (ΔRCT = RCTcDNA − RCTpDNA) has been used as the measurement signal. The analytical signal (in terms of ΔRCT) shows linear relationship with the logarithmic value of the complementary target DNA concentration ranging from 10−13 to 10−6 M (Fig. S3†) and follows the following equation:

Selectivity of the pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode towards non-complementary, one-base mismatch sequences and various water-borne pathogens (Salmonella typhimurium, Neisseria meningitides, Shigella dysenteriae, Clostridium botulinum and Klebsiella pneumonia) has been further studied using EIS (Fig. 7). When the pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode is treated with the non-complementary DNA, a negligible increase in RCT value is observed (ΔRCT = 28.49 Ω). Since, the non-complementary DNA bases do not match with the pDNA bases, it is expected that there is no duplex formation and hence the RCT value remains unvaried. When the pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode is incubated with the single-base mismatch DNA sequence, a significant value of ΔRCT (149.28 Ω) is obtained. This may be due to the partial hybridization of pDNA that results in a slight increase of negative charge on the bioelectrode surface, leading to repulsion of [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− redox ions. Specificity studies have been conducted by isolating DNA from a panel of strains of E. coli, and other water-borne pathogens as shown in the bar diagram. A marked increase of 549.98 Ω in the RCT value is seen after incubation of the bioelectrode with the clinical E. coli strain, which indicates complete hybridization. A negligible change in RCT value is noticed for pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode after incubation with clinical samples of other water-borne pathogens, revealing the specificity of this biosensor for E. coli detection.

Regeneration studies have been performed by immersing the fabricated bioelectrode into Tris–EDTA buffer solution (pH 8.0) at 100 °C for 5 min, followed by cooling in the ice bath for about 30 min.20 The results obtained for each successive denaturation and regeneration process have been plotted in terms of ΔRCTversus the number of detection cycles. It is found that the ΔRCT value for the bioelectrode decreases after each cycle and reduces to about 81% of the initial value (1st cycle) after eight regeneration processes (Fig. S4†). Also, it is to be mentioned that the RCT value of the bioelectrode slightly increased with each consecutive measurement, whereas a decrease in the RCT value is obtained after hybridization. The slight increase in RCT value after each denaturation process may be assigned to the incomplete denaturation at the bioelectrode surface,35 which might lead to a reduced hybridization efficiency thereby resulting in a decreased RCT value after hybridization. Further, the stability of the fabricated DNA biosensor has been investigated via EIS after its hybridization with complementary target DNA. It is found that the bioelectrode retains about 95% of its initial response after about 6 weeks, when stored at 4 °C (data not shown). These results indicate that the label-free EIS strategy based on the PlgNPs/ITO electrode has scope to detect cDNA in a wide concentration range and has a good reusability in comparison to other reported nanomaterials-based impedimetric DNA sensors (Table S2†).36–38

Footnote

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Scheme 1 Schematic illustration for the preparation of PlgNPs, EPD of PlgNPs onto ITO electrode and its application for electrochemical detection of E. coli .

Fig. 1 (i) Transmission electron micrograph (20 nm scale) and (ii) X-ray diffraction pattern of oleic acid-capped IONPs; TEM images of (iii) PLGA–IONPs, and (iv) PlgNPs.

Fig. 2 DLS measurements of PlgNPs showing (i) particle size distributions and (ii) zeta potential values as a function of pH. Inset figure shows the zeta potential measurement of PlgNPs at pH 4.0.

Fig. 3 FTIR spectra of (i) oleic acid-capped IONPs, (ii) chitosan , (iii) PLGA–IONPs, and (iv) PlgNPs.

Fig. 4 SEM images of (i and ii) PlgNPs/ITO electrode and (iii and iv) pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode at magnifications of 5 k× and 10 k× respectively.

Fig. 5 Nyquist diagram ( Z im versus Z re ) for the Faradic impedance measured in PBS solution (pH 7.4) containing 5 mM [Fe(CN) 6 ] 3−/4− , in the frequency range from 10 6 to 10 −2 Hz for (i) PlgNPs/ITO electrode , (ii) pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode, and (iii) cDNA on pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode.

E pa = E o + X ln[(1 − α ) Fυ / RTk s ]	(1)

E pc = E o + Y ln[( α ) Fυ / RTk s ]	(2)

ln k s = α ln(1 − α ) + (1 − α )ln α − ln( RT / nFυ ) − α (1 − α ) nF Δ E p / RT	(3)

I p = n 2 F 2 υAΓ (4 RT ) −1	(4)

I p = (2.99 × 10 5 ) α 1/2 n 3/2 ACD 1/2 υ 1/2	(5)

A = S /(2.99 × 10 5 ) n 3/2 α 1/2 CD 1/2	(6)

Sl. no	Name of the electrode	Electron transfer coefficient, α	Charge transfer rate constant, k s /s −1	Effective surface area, A eff /mm 2	Average surface coverage, Γ /mol cm −2	Diffusion coefficient, D /cm 2 s −1
1	pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO	0.64	61.73	0.73	1.07 × 10 −7	2.26 × 10 −10
2	pDNA/Ch–IONPs/ITO	0.57	28.90	0.33	6.46 × 10 −8	1.45 × 10 −10

Δ R CT = 73.030log C + 1028.957	(7)

Fig. 6 EIS response of pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode as a function of cDNA concentration (10 −13 to 10 −6 M) in PBS solution (pH 7.4) containing 5 mM [Fe(CN) 6 ] 3−/4− .

Fig. 7 Bar diagram showing the impedimetric response (in terms of Δ R CT ) of pDNA/PlgNPs/ITO bioelectrode incubated with (i) non-complementary, (ii) single-base mismatch, and (iii–viii) DNA extracted from culture of water-borne pathogens.

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr34355c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013