pharmaceutics
Article
An Injectable Nano-Enabled Thermogel to Attain Controlled
Delivery of p11 Peptide for the Potential Treatment of Ocular
Angiogenic Disorders of the Posterior Segment
Lisa Claire du Toit, Yahya Essop Choonara *
and Viness Pillay


Citation: du Toit, L.C.; Choonara,
Y.E.; Pillay, V. An Injectable
Nano-Enabled Thermogel to Attain
Controlled Delivery of p11 Peptide
for the Potential Treatment of Ocular
Angiogenic Disorders of the Posterior
Segment. Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
pharmaceutics13020176
Academic Editor:
María Ángeles Solinís
Received: 27 December 2020
Accepted: 20 January 2021
Published: 28 January 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Wits Advanced Drug Delivery Platform Research Unit, Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, School of
Therapeutic Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 7 York Road,
Parktown 2193, South Africa; lisa.dutoit@wits.ac.za (L.C.d.T.); viness.pillay@wits.ac.za (V.P.)
* Correspondence: yahya.choonara@wits.ac.za; Tel.: +27-11-717-2052; Fax: +27-11-642-4355 or +27-86-553-4733
Abstract: This investigation focused on the design of an injectable nano-enabled thermogel (nano-
thermogel) system to attain controlled delivery of p11 anti-angiogenic peptide for proposed effective
prevention of neovascularisation and to overcome the drawbacks of the existing treatment approaches
for ocular disorders characterised by angiogenesis, which employ multiple intravitreal injections
of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) antibodies. Synthesis of a polyethylene
glycol-polycaprolactone-polyethylene glycol (PEG-PCL-PEG) triblock co-polymer was undertaken,
followed by characterisation employing Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) to ascertain the
chemical stability and integrity of the co-polymer instituted for nano-thermogel formulation. The
p11 anti-angiogenic peptide underwent encapsulation within poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
nanoparticles via a double emulsion solvent evaporation method and was incorporated into the
thermogel following characterisation by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), zeta size and zeta-
potential analysis. The tube inversion approach and rheological analysis were employed to ascertain
the thermo-sensitive sol-gel conversion of the nano-thermogel system. Chromatographic assessment
of the in vitro release of the peptide was performed, with stability conﬁrmation via Tris-Tricine
PAGE (Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis). In vitro biocompatibility of the nano-thermogel system
was investigated employing a retinal cell line (ARP-19). A nanoparticle size range of 100–200 nm
and peptide loading efﬁciency of 67% was achieved. Sol-gel conversion of the nano-thermogel
was observed between 32–45 ◦C. Release of the peptide in vitro was sustained, with maintenance
of stability, for 60 days. Biocompatibility assessment highlighted 97–99% cell viability with non-
haemolytic ability, which supports the potential applicability of the nano-thermogel system for
extended delivery of peptide for ocular disorder treatment.
Keywords: angiogenesis; peptide; ocular drug delivery; thermosensitive hydrogel; nanoparticles
1. Introduction
Retinopathy of prematurity (RP), age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and dia-
betic retinopathy (DR) are angiogenesis-related ocular diseases, which are prevalent from
youth to old age and are principally attributed to the occurrence of irreversible blindness
globally [1–3]. Even though these diseases affect all age groups, the pathology of these
diseases are similar and include abnormal neovascularisation. Growth of new blood vessels
from the retina of DR and RP patients leads to bleeding inside the vitreous and ends in
ﬁbrosis and visual loss [4]. In AMD patients, complete loss of vision occurs due to the
overgrowth of blood vessels over the retina from the choroid region [4]. The major reason
behind neovascularisation is hypoxia and oxidative stress which further triggers a cascade
of angiogenic events. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) is one of the key compo-
nents in the normal angiogenesis cascade [5]. During angiogenesis, the endothelial cells
Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics13020176
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/pharmaceutics

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
2 of 19
interact through integrin molecules in the extracellular matrix for subsequent endothelial
cell activation, proliferation and migration [6].
Current treatment strategies are thus focused on VEGF inhibition using neutralising
antibodies against VEGF, VEGF receptor-suppressing SiRNA (small interfering RNA) or by
inhibiting VEGF signaling (kinase inhibitor). There are currently four FDA-approved anti-
VEGF therapies for the treatment of AMD: MacugenTM (pegaptanib sodium), LucentisTM
(ranibizumab), Eylea™(Aﬂibercept) and most recently, Beovu™(Brolucizumab) [7]. How-
ever, there are concerns regarding the administration of anti-VEGF treatment since VEGF
is normally expressed in the eye and also serves as a survival factor and neuroprotectant
for retinal neurons [8–10]. Moreover, systemic administration of anti-VEGF therapy will
also affect other ocular tissue and organ systems [11].
Partial regulation of angiogenesis is via speciﬁc integrin transmembrane glycoproteins,
hence current research is focused largely on anti-integrin therapy [12,13]. High expression
of integrin αvβ3 occurs in angiogenic endothelial cells and tumours [12], with selective
expression of integrin αvβ3 on the choroid neovascularisation (CNV) membrane during
ocular angiogenesis, whereas in DR tissue, there is the presence of both αvβ3 and αvβ5 [13].
A few investigations highlighted that integrin antagonists can be considered as a target for
ocular angiogenic disorders as an emerging treatment approach. p11 is a cell permeable
hexapeptide (HS-DVHK) with a SDV sequence speciﬁcally bound to αvβ3 integrins instead
of the RGD sequences, a common binding sequence of the integrin motif. p11 inhibits
neovascularisation via αvβ3 integrin blocking without any side effects [14]. Bang et al. [14]
demonstrated that this results in the suppression of bFGF-induced human umbilical vein
endothelial cell (HUVEC) proliferation in endothelial cells, achieved through disruption of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2
signaling (through inhibition of their phosphorylation at 10 µg/mL) and p53-mediated
induction of apoptosis (at 50 µg/mL). This suppression is thus dose dependent. Even
though the mechanism of anti-angiogenesis of p11 peptide has been studied in detail, a
delivery system for p11 peptide has not been established as yet. Small peptides are always
advantageous as therapeutic agents because of their non-toxicity and high speciﬁcity.
However, the delivery of the peptides, with maintenance of their integrity in a sustained
manner, is a persistent challenge.
Substantial advancement in the ﬁeld of ocular drug delivery has been witnessed
through recent developments in pharmaceutical ocular formulation technology including
cyclodextrins, polymeric gel and colloidal systems [15]. However, the route of administra-
tion to the ocular posterior segment is still a hurdle, and this is the reason that angiogenic
ocular disorders are the foremost cause of blindness. Among the various routes of drug
administration, oral and systemic delivery of anti-angiogenic drug/peptide is not suitable
since it requires considerable drug loading and causes systemic side effects [16]. Intrav-
itreal injection is the current FDA-approved therapy. This mainly bypasses both blood
retinal barriers as well as structural and functional barriers. However, ocular diseases
being chronic in nature require continuous and repeated injections, which can cause retinal
detachment, endophthalmitis, cataract and haemorrhage, which affects patient compliance
in repeated injections [17]. Non-degradable and biodegradable implants can be an effective
way to ensure long-term sustainable and stable delivery of protein for the treatment of
ocular diseases. However, the stability of proteins/peptides in prolonged polymer ma-
trices until the time of delivery requires remarkable improvement. Recently, hydrogels
have been studied for stable delivery of proteins and peptides and have the advantage of
good biocompatibility [18]. Among different hydrogel systems, thermo-sensitive in situ
gel-forming hydrogels have gained greater importance for protein delivery because of their
feasibility for enabling incorporation of proteins at low temperature (solution) and gelling
after injection at physiological temperature [19].
The current investigation is centred on the construction of a nanoparticle (NP)-
embedded injectable thermosensitive copolymeric hydrogel system for effective ocular
delivery of anti-angiogenic peptides in a sustainable manner without affecting their stabil-

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
3 of 19
ity. p11 peptide was encapsulated in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles and
embedded into an injectable polyethylene glycol-polycaprolactone-polyethylene glycol
(PEG-PCL-PEG)-based thermogel system (nano-thermogel) for the proposed purpose of
introduction into and gel formation in the eye, following injection either in the subconjunc-
tival space or intravitreally (Figure 1). PLGA, a FDA-approved biodegradable polymer,
has been applied for the delivery of various therapeutic agents in the eye and is generally
well tolerated in vivo [20–22]. Moreover, several studies have been reported where PLGA
nanoparticles mediated efﬁcient and stable delivery of peptide molecules [23,24].
Figure 1. Schematic depiction of the componential formulation and proposed delivery of the thermo-
nanogel system.
Various investigators have reported the synthesis of the biodegradable thermosensitive
hydrogel based on the PEG-PCL-PEG and PCL-PEG-PCL triblock copolymers [18,25–29],
which improves on the biodegradability of PCL through incorporation of molecular blocks
of the hydrophilic PEG [29]. The hydrogel is a ﬂowing sol at low temperature, that can
be injected in combination with a pharmaceutical agent, forming a nonﬂowing gel at
body temperature, thus serving as a sustained drug delivery site in vivo [18,25–27] and
demonstrating potential ophthalmic applications [30].
The PEG-PCL-PEG triblock copolymer’s chemical structure and integrity was evalu-
ated using FTIR and 1H-NMR spectroscopy. In addition to PEG-PCL-PEG, Pluronic F 127
(PLU) and a mixture of PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogels were prepared for a comparative
evaluation. This approach enabled the development of a drug delivery system which has
the potential for the stable delivery of anti-angiogenic p11 peptide to the retina over a
prolonged period, thereby overcoming the limitations associated with repeated intravitreal
injections. The thermosensitivity of the hydrogel was evaluated in conjunction with the
release kinetics of the peptide over a period of 2 months. In vitro biocompatibility and
haemolytic properties of the developed system were assessed in order to ascertain the
safety of the drug delivery system.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
4 of 19
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Materials
ε-Caprolactone (ε-CL), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA MW 14KDa), methyl thiozol tetra-
zolium (MTT), poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether (MPEG, MW = 4000), stannous octoate
(Sn(Oct)2, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) isophorone diisocyanate (IPDI), Pluronic F 127 tri-
block copolymer, Tris-HCl, tricine, TEMED, ammonium per sulphate, 40% acrylamide-bis
acrylamide solution, sodium dodecyl sulphate and ultra-low molecular weight protein
marker were acquired from Sigma Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA). Sodium azide was ob-
tained from UniLab, Republic of South Africa. P11 hexapeptide (Sequence H-S-D-V-H-K,
MW 721 Da) and FITC-p11 hexapeptide (Sequence FITC-Ahx-H-S-D-V-H-K, MW 1224 Da)
were obtained from Peptorn Private LTD (Daejeon, Korea). PBS 1X was purchased from
Merck (New York, NY, USA). Retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE-1) were obtained from
ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Minimum Essential Medium (MEM),
Trypsin EDTA, FBS and penicillin/streptomycin solutions were purchased from Sigma
Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA). PLGA with monomer ratio (lactic acid and glycolic acid) of
75/25 was obtained as a gift from PURASORB, Holland. Tween® 80, dichloromethane and
petroleum ether were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany).
2.2. Preparation of PLGA Nanoparticles
A double emulsion solvent evaporation (water-in-oil-in-water, w/o/w) technique
was employed for PLGA nanoparticle synthesis. Brieﬂy, 20 mg PLGA (75/25) in 2 mL of
dichloromethane was injected into 200 µL of PBS pH 7.4 containing 20 µg FITC–p11 peptide
(w1/O) and agitated at 3000 rpm for 3 min using a magnetic stirrer. This emulsion was then
injected into 10 mL of a second aqueous phase composed of 1.5% w/v PVA and 0.02% w/v
Tween® 80 and agitated at 6000 rpm over varying time periods (2, 3, 5, 8 and 10 min). Thus,
ﬁve different nanoparticle formulations were prepared (Formulation 1, F 1, to Formulation
5, F 5). The emulsion was allowed to remain un-agitated for 2 min and then incubated on
ice for 15 min. Thereafter, the organic solvent was evaporated using a rotavapor under
vacuum with continuous agitation at 500 rpm (25 ◦C) for 3 h. The nanoparticles were
centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 ◦C. The harvested nanoparticles were washed
twice with deionised water and re-suspended in deionised water for lyophilisation. The
lyophilised nanoparticles were stored at 4 ◦C until further use and analysis. The preferred
formulation having a combination of comparatively small nanoparticle diameter, good
polydispersity index (low) and enhanced encapsulation efﬁciency was identiﬁed for future
characterisations.
2.3. Characterisation of the PLGA Nanoparticles
2.3.1. Measurement of the PLGA Nanoparticle Size, Heterogeneity and Surface Stability
The diameter of the synthesised placebo and peptide-loaded PLGA nanoparticles were
ascertained via dynamic light scattering (DTS nano, Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcester-
shire, UK). Samples were re-suspended and diluted with deionised water and analysed.
The mean diameter and poly-dispersity indices were calculated as a mean of three distinct
batches for each formulation. The zeta potential (ζ) of the nanoparticles was measured in
water by means of a Zetasizer Nano Z (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK). An
average of 3 measurements was taken as the data point.
2.3.2. Determination of Nanoparticle Morphology
Scanning electron microscopic images (FEI Nova Nanolab 600 FIB/SEM, Hillsboro,
OR, USA) were acquired for the analysis of the morphology of the nanoparticles. Dilute
preparations of nanoparticles were dispersed on aluminium stubs, dehydrated by air
drying and sputter coated with gold. Nanoparticles encapsulating FITC-conjugated p11
peptide were further imaged using confocal microscopy (CF5-Zeiss LSM 510, Oberkochen,
Germany) using a 488 nm excitation ﬁlter for FITC.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
5 of 19
2.3.3. Determination of Nanoparticle Encapsulation Efﬁciency
Peptide encapsulation efﬁciency of the nanoparticles was analysed after separation of
the particle from aqueous preparation followed by solvent evaporation. As described by
Geng et al. [31], the quantity of free peptide present in the supernatant aqueous phase after
separation of the particle by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 5 min was determined by ultra-
performance liquid chromatography (UPLC, Waters® Acquity UPLCTM system, Miliford,
MA, USA). Triplicate experiments were conducted for peptide extraction and analysis for
each formulation. The encapsulation efﬁciency was calculated using Equation (1):
Encapsulation Efﬁciency (EE%) = Quantity of Total Peptide −Quantity of Free Peptide
Quantity of Total Peptide
× 100
(1)
2.4. Synthesis of the PEG-PCL-PEG Copolymeric Thermogel
A PEG-PCL-PEG copolymer was synthesised by ring-opening polymerisation of ε-
caprolactone using MPEG (MW 4000) as a macro-initiator with the inclusion of stannous
octate (Sn(Oct)2) as a catalyst and IPDI as a coupling agent as described and schematised
by Gong et al. [25]. Brieﬂy, 0.098 M ε-caprolactone and 0.007 M of MPEG 4000 were added
into a three necked vessel under a dry nitrogen atmosphere. Stannous octate (100 µL) was
added and maintained at the reaction temperature of 125 ◦C for 24 h, with IPDI (0.008 M)
added as a coupling agent at the 6 h point with stirring. The resultant copolymer was
degassed for 10 min. In order to isolate the pure copolymer, the product was cooled
to room temperature, dissolved in dichloromethane and subsequently precipitated with
petroleum ether which was previously refrigerated for 1 h. The precipitate was then ﬁltered
and vacuum dried at room temperature for 24 h. Pluronic F 127 (PLU) and a mixture of
PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogels were prepared for comparative evaluations in the following
concentrations: PLU-10%, 15% and 25% w/v; PEG-PCL-PEG-10%, 15% and 25% w/v; and
PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU-25% w/v of PEG-PCL-PEG and 25% w/v of PLU in ratios of 1:0.5,
1:0.75 and 1:1.
2.5. Characterisation of the PEG-PCL-PEG Copolymeric Thermogel
2.5.1. Chemical Structure and Integrity Analysis of the Thermogel System
Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the synthesised copolymer were recorded
using a Spectrum 2000 spectrometer with a MIRTGS detector (PerkinElmer Spectrum 100,
Wales, UK). Samples were processed by a universal ATR polarisation accessory for the
FTIR spectrum series. The resolution was at 4 cm−1 and scanned from wavenumber 600
to 4000 cm−1. In addition, 1H-nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) spectra in CDCl3
were generated on a spectrometer (Fourier 300, Bruker, Switzerland) at 400 MHz in order
to characterise the integrity of the synthesised copolymer.
2.5.2. Thermosensitive Behaviour of the Nano-Thermogel System
Rheological Transitions of the Thermogel
The thermosensitive behaviour of the PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU
mixture was rheologically analysed. The rheological measurements were investigated
employing a Haake MARS, Modular Advanced Rheometer system (Thermoscientiﬁc,
Dreieich, Germany). The instrument was pre-equipped with a thermo-bath that controlled
the temperature of the sample chamber within the required value. In order to measure
the gelation temperature of the copolymer solution, temperature sweep analysis was
performed at 1 Hz, at a rate of temperature increase of 1 ◦C/min between 10–60 ◦C. The
dynamic viscoelastic property such as the shear storage modulus (G’) was measured as a
function of temperature for different concentrations of the hydrogel formulation.
Determination of Sol-Gel Conversion: Tube Inversion Method
It is imperative to study the sol-gel conversion of the hydrogels, as an appropriate
gelation temperature and the strength of the injected gel are necessary parameters for

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
6 of 19
in vivo application. Various concentrations of PEG-PCL-PEG and PLU copolymer solutions
were prepared and 3 mL of each polymer solution was placed into the 10 mL screw-capped
glass vials. The tubes were immersed into a water bath where the temperature was
regulated to increase from 20 ◦C to 60 ◦C at 2 ◦C/min. The time and temperature required
to affect a sol-gel conversion was visualised by inverting the tube. The physical state
at which there was no visual ﬂow of the polymer solution was characterised as the gel
state. The experiment was conducted on the native PEG-PCL-PEG and Pluronic hydrogels
at different concentrations. Sol-gel conversion of the PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU blend was
evaluated at varying ratios of Pluronic and PEG-PCL-PEG copolymers.
2.5.3. Swelling Behaviour of the Thermogel System
For determining the swelling potential of the gel for prediction of in vivo behaviour
following ocular injection, 1 mL of the PEG-PCL-PEG, Pluronic and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU
solution was placed into a 10 mL vial, and gelled at 37 ◦C. The height of the gel was
recorded as zero-time. Phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 3 mL, pH 7.4) was added into the
vial and incubated at 37 ◦C at 50rpm. At speciﬁed time points, replacement of the medium
with 3 mL fresh PBS was performed and the gel height (Hx) was recorded until 60 days.
Calculation of the swelling ratio was as per Equation (2):
Swelling Ratio = Hx −H0
H0
× 100
(2)
where H0 and Hx are the heights of the gel at zero-time and speciﬁed time intervals (i.e.,
3 h, 6 h, 12 h, etc.), respectively.
2.5.4. Thermal Transitions of the Thermogel System
Thermal properties of PEG-PCL-PEG, PLU and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogels were
determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis using STARe System cou-
pled with analytical computational software (Mettler Toledo, Greifensee, Switzerland).
Approximately 10 mg of each polymer was placed in crimped aluminium pans. The melt-
ing and re-crystallisation behaviour of the various hydrogel combinations in the range of
0–150 ◦C with a heating and cooling rate of 5 ◦C/min was carried out.
2.5.5. Determination of the Surface Architecture of the Thermogel System
Surface morphology of the PEG-PCL-PEG, PLU and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU dried hydro-
gels was investigated employing scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI Nova Nanolab
600 FIB/SEM, Hillsboro, OR, USA). Cross-sections of lyophilised hydrogels were mounted
on aluminium stubs and gold sputter coated for acquisition of scanning electron micro-
scopic images.
2.5.6. In Vitro Peptide Release from the Nanoparticles and Nano-Enabled
Thermogel System
In vitro peptide release kinetics of p11 peptide from PLGA nanoparticles and the
nano-thermogel were analysed in PBS (pH 7.4, 37 ◦C) with 0.02% sodium azide. Brieﬂy,
PLGA nanoparticles containing 20 µg p11 peptide were accurately weighed based on the
encapsulation efﬁciency and were re-suspended in 2 mL PBS and transferred into a dialysis
bag (MWCO 12KDa). The nanoparticle suspension was then immersed into 10 mL PBS
and incubated at 37 ◦C at 50 rpm. At speciﬁc time intervals, 200 µL of PBS was removed,
centrifuged and the supernatant analysed for p11 peptide. The pellet was resuspended
with 200 µL fresh PBS and added to the vial to maintain sink conditions. For release
studies from the nanoparticle-embedded hydrogels, accurately weighed nanoparticles
were mixed with respective polymer solutions at <20 ◦C and transferred into a dialysis bag
(molecular weight cut off 12 KDa). The dialysis bag with polymer solutions was immersed
into 10 mL sterile PBS, and pre-heated to 37 ◦C for 2 min for gel formation. The vials
were subsequently incubated at 37 ◦C 50 rpm. At speciﬁc time intervals, 200 µL PBS was

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
7 of 19
removed, centrifuged and the supernatant was analysed for p11 peptide. The pellet was
resuspended with 200 µL fresh PBS and added to the vial to maintain sink conditions.
The in vitro peptide release data were ﬁtted to various kinetic models in order to
describe the release mechanisms. The following plots were constructed: cumulative %
drug release vs. time (zero order kinetic model); log cumulative of % drug remaining
vs. time (ﬁrst order kinetic model); cumulative % drug release vs. square root of time
(Higuchi model) log cumulative % drug release vs. log time (Korsmeyer model) and
cube root of drug % remaining in matrix vs. time (Hixson–Crowell cube root law). The
Korsmeyer–Peppas model provides a simple relationship describing drug release from a
polymeric system. The n value is used to characterise different release mechanisms as for
cylindrical shaped matrices, which may be n ≤0.45 for Fickian diffusion, 0.45 < n < 0.89
for anomalous (non-Fickian) diffusion, n = 0.89 for case-II transport and n > 0.89 for super
case-II transport.
Stability of the released peptides was evaluated using 16.5% Tris-Tricine poly acry-
lamide gel electrophoresis. SDS-PAGE was thus employed to ascertain that the molecular
mass or integrity of the released peptide (i.e., stability) was maintained and that it did not
undergo extensive proteolysis (protein hydrolysis). The experiment was repeated similarly
to the in vitro release study and 20µL of the sample was collected after 5, 10, 20, 35, 45 and
55 days. The 20 µL samples were mixed with 2× Tricine sample buffer (100mM Tris-HCl,
pH 6.8, 5% v/v mercaptoethanol, 0.02% w/v bromophenol blue, 24% w/v glycerol, 8% w/v
SDS), heated at 65◦C for 2 min and loaded in the well containing 16.5% Tris-Tricine gel.
The gel was run under non-reducing conditions at 75 V for 55 min using Tris-Tricine buffer
(0.1 M Tris, 0.1M Tricine, 0.1% w/v SDS pH 8.25). The 16.5% gel was then stained with
a Proteosilver silver staining kit (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and imaged using
Imagequant 300, version 1.0.3, GE Healthcare Lifesciences, Germany.
UPLC Analysis for p11 Peptide Determination
The quantitative determination of p11 peptides was carried out employing ultra
performance liquid chromatography (UPLC, Waters® Acquity UPLCTM system, Miliford,
MA, USA) via adaptation from a method previously developed for UPLC detection of
peptides [32]. Gradient baseline separation was obtained with parameters and conditions
elaborated in Table 1. Prior ﬁltration of all solutions and solvents was performed through a
0.22 µm ﬁlter (Millipore Co. Billerica, MA, USA). The samples for analysis were centrifuged
at 20,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 ◦C.
Table 1. UPLC (ultra performance liquid chromatography) speciﬁcations and method parameters.
Parameters
Values/Conditions
Strong wash
90% v/v acetronitrile 10% v/v water
Weak wash
10% v/v water: 90% v/v acetronitrile
Mobile phase
A: 0.1% TFA * water, B: 0.1% TFA * acetronitrile
Gradient
0% B in 2 min, 0–30% B in 10 min30–90% B in 2 min
Flow rate
1 mL/min
Column speciﬁcation
C18
Injection volume
7 µL
Run time
12 min
Column temperature
25 ◦C
Sample temperature
25 ◦C
Pump pressure
6000 ± 500 psi
Delta value
<10
Wavelength of absorption
220 nm
* Triﬂuoracetic acid.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
8 of 19
2.6. Biocompatibility Evaluation of the Nano-Enabled Thermogel System
Nano-thermogel biocompatibility was evaluated in a retinal pigment epithelial cell
culture (RPE-1, ATCC). Maintenance of the cells was achieved in DMEM, incorporating
10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin antibiotics at 37 ◦C, 95% humidity and 5% CO2.
Sub-culturing of the cells was undertaken every second day employing trypsin-EDTA with
a seeding density 5 × 104 cells/mL.
For biocompatibility evaluation, sterile samples (0.5 mL) of each copolymer solution
(25% w/v of PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG, PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU and NP/PLU/PEG-PCL-PEG),
achieved by sterile ﬁltration through a 0.22 µm ﬁlter (possessing the least impact on
rheological properties of hydrogels), were placed into Eppendorf tubes and were incubated
at 37 ◦C to form the gel. FBS (1.5 mL of 10%) containing DMEM was added to the gel in
each Eppendorf tube and incubated at 37 ◦C for 60 days. At each time point (1, 3, 5, 10, 20,
30, 50 and 60 days), 200 µL of the medium was sampled and replaced with fresh DMEM.
The sample medium was stored at 4 ◦C.
A 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5- diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) cell viabil-
ity assay was undertaken to evaluate the cytotoxicity of hydrogels towards RPE-1 cells.
Seeding of the cells onto a 96-well plate with a seeding density of 10,000 cells/well was
undertaken. After conﬂuency, the medium was removed with addition of 100 µL of release
medium and incubation for 24 and 48 h. Following incubation, there was careful removal
of the test medium and addition of 10% MTT solution followed by incubation for 3 h at
37 ◦C and 5% CO2. Subsequently, MTT solvent (100 µL) was added with careful mixing,
and the absorbance measured at 570 nm.
2.7. Haemolytic Activity of the Nano-Enabled Thermogel System
The direct contact method was employed to study the haemolytic activity of the
various thermogel combinations (PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG, PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU) and the nano-
enabled thermogel (NP/PLU/PEG-PCL-PEG). The application of whole rabbit blood
enabled determination of the haemolysis of the samples. Whole blood (450 µL) was treated
with 50 µL of hydrogel, agitated gently and incubated at 37 ◦C for 3 h. Triton × 100 is taken
as the positive control and polyethylene glycol as the negative control. Centrifugation of the
suspension at 1000 rpm for 15 min was performed following incubation, with subsequent
measurement of the absorbance of the supernatant of each tube via a multiplate reader
(Bio-Rad, Model 680, UK) at a wavelength of 545 nm. The percentage haemolysis was
calculated using Equation (3):
Haemolysis% = ODS −ODNC
ODPC −ODNC
× 100
(3)
where OD refers to optical density, S refers to sample, NC is the negative control and PC is
the positive control.
2.8. Data Presentation and Statistical Analyses
Unless otherwise indicated, data are represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical sig-
niﬁcance was determined using a Student’s t-test with a 95% conﬁdence interval, unless
otherwise noted. Statistical calculations were performed employing Microsoft Excel.
3. Results
3.1. Synthetic Parameters and Characterisation of the PLGA Nanoparticles
In this study, PLGA nanoparticles were prepared for the stable encapsulation of p11
peptide. A double emulsion approach was followed for PLGA nanoparticle formulation.
The primary emulsion was prepared by blending PLGA solution in the organic phase
with the aqueous phase containing FITC-conjugated peptide molecules. Table 2 describes
the parameters adopted for preparing different nanoparticles. In this study, the time
of agitation for the second emulsion was varied between 2–10 min while keeping the
homogenising speed constant. The particle size, polydispersity index and encapsulation

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
9 of 19
efﬁciency of the nanoparticles were ascertained (Figure 2a, Table 2). Results showed that
particle size varied from 110 nm to 416 nm, with Formulation 1 having the maximum
size as compared with Formulation 4. It was observed that as the agitation time of the
second emulsion increased, the particle size decreased from 416 nm to 110 nm. This
reduction in particle size is a common observation, with the increasing shear rate from
the increased stirring speed reducing the droplet size of the emulsion and ultimately the
nanoparticles formed, as also observed for example by Geng et al. [31] for their PLGA
nanoparticles. However, increasing the stirring time further led to an increase in the particle
size, i.e., 220.6 nm for Formulation 5. A similar trend was observed for the polydispersity
indices. This higher stirring speed may have destabilised the emulsion leading to enhanced
nanoparticle collision and subsequent aggregation with subsequent formation of some
larger nanoparticles, and a corresponding increase in the polydispersity index.
Table 2. Physicochemical characterisation of p11 peptide-loaded PLGA (poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)) nanoparticles.
Formulation #
Stirring Time (Min)
Zeta Size (nm)
Polydispersity
Index
Zeta Potential
(mV)
Encapsulation
Efﬁciency (%)
S1
S2
F 1
3
2
416.0
0.503
−33.5 ± 4.8
69.5
F 2
3
3
318.4
0.410
−30.3 ± 3.9
65.7
F 3
3
5
128.4
0.219
−34.6 ± 9.1
63.7
F 4
3
8
110.0
0.260
−38.5 ± 4.8
34.9
F 5
3
10
220.6
0.560
−22.5 ± 6.4
14.8
Figure 2. (a) Particle size and zeta potential analysis of the native and FITC-p11 peptide-encapsulated
nanoparticles. (b) (i) SEM (scanning electron microscopy) image of nanoparticle. (ii) High magnifica-
tion SEM image. (iii) Confocal microscopic image of the FITC-P11 peptide-encapsulated nanoparticles.
The PLGA nanoparticles formulated display a negative zeta potential as a result of
the ionised carboxyl groups present in PLGA as reported by various investigators such as
Nicolete et al. [33]. Loading of p11 peptide into the nanoparticles increased the negative
surface charge of the nanoparticles. The p11 anti-angiogenic peptide possesses regions of
positivity and negativity. At the neutral pH at which the zeta potential was measured, an
overall negative charge dominated, resulting in the more negative surface charge following
peptide encapsulation.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
10 of 19
Formulation 1 obtained the highest peptide encapsulation (69.5%); further increases
in the agitation to 10 min decreased the efﬁciency to 14.8%. The results are consistent with
previous reports by Geng et al. [31] where various parameters affecting the nanoparticle size
and encapsulation efﬁciency were studied. In terms of encapsulation efﬁciency, particle size
and polydispersity index, Formulation 3 was identiﬁed as the preferred system having an
average particle size of 128.4nm, with a polydispersity index of 0.219 and an encapsulation
efﬁciency of 63.7%.
SEM images of the optimal PLGA nanoparticles (Formulation 3) revealed a spherical,
smooth morphology in the nano-range (Figure 2b (i,ii)). The FITC-p11 peptide encapsula-
tion was conﬁrmed with confocal microscopic images of the nanoparticle suspension at
488 nm excitation (Figure 2b (iii)).
3.2. Synthesis and Characterisation of the PEG-PCL-PEG Copolymer Thermogel System
Figure 3a presents FTIR spectra of PEG-PCL-PEG triblock copolymer. The charac-
teristic absorption peak of the repeated –OCH2CH2 unit of PEG and –COO-stretching
vibration were observed at 1104 cm−1 and 1243 cm−1, respectively [18,25]. A solid absorp-
tion peak was observed at 1733cm−1, representing the stretching vibration of the C=O ester
carbonyl group of PCL. The absorption bands at 2943 cm−1 and 2868 cm−1 correspond to
the C–H stretching vibrations of PCL and PEG, respectively. Thus, FTIR spectra showed
characteristic peaks of both PEG and PCL segments in the PEG-PCL-PEG copolymer.
Figure 3. (a) Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy of PEG, ε-caprolactone and PEG-PCL-PEG
(polyethylene glycol-polycaprolactone-polyethylene glycol). (b) NMR spectroscopy of PEG-PCL-PEG.
The copolymer was further characterised by 1H-NMR spectroscopy to conﬁrm the
synthesis of PEG-PCL-PEG. The characteristic absorption peaks were indicated in Figure 3b.
The sharp absorption peak at 3.6 represents the methylene protons of the –CH2CH2O-

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
11 of 19
group in the PEG block, while the smaller peak at 3.4 ppm is attributed to the –OCH3
end group in the PEG block. The peaks at 1.35, 1.6, 2.32, and 4.06 ppm are attributed to
–(CH2)3–, –OCCH2– and –CH2OOC– methylene protons in the PCL block. Weak peaks at
4.2 and 3.75 ppm indicate the methylene protons of –O-CH2-CH2– in the PEG end blocks
which link with PCL. The peak at 0.9 ppm represents the –CH3 end group of IPDI. This
correlates with the observations of Gong et al. [25], who also undertook further extensive
characterisation of this triblock [18,26,27]; the PEG-PCL-PEG copolymer formulated herein
was achieved via their synthetic approach.
3.2.1. Temperature-Dependent Sol-Gel Transitions of the Thermogel
The sol-gel conversion of PEG-PCL-PEG in comparison to Pluronic (PLU) thermogel at
different concentrations was studied. In comparison to Pluronic, PEG-PCL-PEG has a very
low sol-gel conversion window. It was observed that below a 10% w/v concentration, PEG-
PCL-PEG could not form a gel over the temperature range of 0–50 ◦C. Aqueous solutions
of PEG-PCL-PEG transformed into a gel at a concentration above the critical gelation
concentration as the temperature (lower critical gelation temperature, LCGT) increased.
This is primarily due to micelle packing and aggregation [34,35]. Sol-gel conversion of 20%
w/v PEG-PCL-PEG was transient with a very narrow conversion window i.e., between
36 ◦C and 40 ◦C. Above 40 ◦C, the gel rapidly transformed into its solution form. Further,
as the concentration increased the sol-gel conversion window broadened, with a shift in
LCGT from 35 ◦C to 24 ◦C as concentration increased to 20% and 50% w/v, respectively
(Figure 4a). Moreover, the upper critical gelation temperature (UCGT) shifted from 38 ◦C
to 45 ◦C as concentration varied from 20 to 50% w/v. Pluronic hydrogel showed a broad
conversion window starting from the concentration of 10% w/v (Figure 4a). The LCGT of
Pluronic gel was observed as 10 ◦C–0 ◦C for 20–50% w/v and UCGT as 29 ◦C and 35 ◦C for
the concentration 20% w/v and 50% w/v, respectively.
Sol-gel conversion of PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel solution was carried out using
25% w/v of both the polymer solutions at varying ratios. Three different ratios of PEG-
PCL-PEG/PLU were analysed viz., 1:0.5, 1:0.75 and 1:1. It was observed that the 1:1
concentration, PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU could not form a gel at 37 ◦C compared to 1:0.5 and
1:0.75 ratios (Figure 4b).
The effect of the addition of PLGA nanoparticles on the systems was that they slightly
reduced the sol-gel transition temperature of the hydrogels as the NPs expanded the
temperature range of the sol phase compared to the pristine networks, but this effect was
found to be minimal during preliminary investigations (p > 0.05).
These observations were further analysed via rheological analysis (Figure 4c,d). The
investigation on modulus of the gel (G’) vs. temperature for varying concentrations of
PEG-PCL-PEG and a comparative study on PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU
(1:0.5) were carried out. Generally, sol-gel transition occurs with a notable variation in
modulus [35,36]. Figure 4c shows that as the concentration of the PEG-PCL-PEG increased
the modulus also increased. There is no signiﬁcant difference in modulus in the case of PLU
and PEG-PCL-PEG with similar concentrations (25% w/v). Blending with PLU increases
the modulus of PEG-PCL-PEG compared to the individual components.
3.2.2. Thermal Analysis of the Thermogel System
Thermograms of optimised PEG-PCL-PEG (25% w/v), PLU (25% w/v) and PEG-
PCL-PEG/PLU (25% w/v of each polymer in 1:0.5 ratio) after lyophilisation were also
investigated (Figure 5a–c). The melting peak observed for PLU was at 60 ◦C. PEG-PCL-
PEG displayed two endothermic melting transitions at 47 ◦C and 32 ◦C, representative of
the melting points of the polymeric components of the triblock, and congruent with the
observations of Gong et al. [18]. However, the blending of the PEG-PCL-PEG with PLU
shows a shift in the melting points of all polymers to a slightly lower temperatures (55, 44
and 26 ◦C) as compared to PLU and PEG-PCL-PEG alone.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
12 of 19

Figure 4. (a) Graphical depiction of sol-gel conversion of Pluronic F127 (red) and PEG-PCL-PEG
hydrogel (blue). (b) Photograph of tube inversion method for sol-gel conversion of the hydrogels at
different concentrations. Rheological analysis of (c) PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogels at different concentra-
tions and (d) comparative analysis of Pluronic, PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogels at
a concentration of 25% w/v.
Figure 5. DSC (differential scanning calorimetry) thermograms of synthesised and lyophilised
hydrogels (a) PEG-PCL-PEG, (b) Pluronic and (c) PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
13 of 19
3.2.3. Swelling Behaviour of the Thermogel System
The developed PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel was incubated in PBS for 60 days in
order to investigate the swelling characteristics of the gel in order to ascertain whether there
would be any potential pressure effects on the ocular tissues following injection, resulting in
potential tissue damage. Figure 6 highlights that PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU
gel did not show signiﬁcant change (p > 0.05) in the height of the gel even after 60 days of
contact with PBS, as compared to pure PLU. At the initial stage (~5 days) a trivial increase
in the height was observed, thereafter the height did not vary notably over the 60 days
of measurement, and thus any negative pressure effects on surrounding ocular tissues
following injection would proposedly be minimal.
Figure 6. Graphical depiction of swelling ratio of the investigated hydrogel systems.
3.3. In Vitro Peptide Release from the Nanoparticles and Nano-Enabled Thermogel System
The in vitro release behaviour of p11 peptide was undertaken in PBS (pH 7.4, 37 ◦C)
for a period of 60 days as graphically depicted in Figure 7a. In this study, 50% of the
peptide was released within 5 h from the PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU
hydrogel system, whereas there was a controlled release of 75–80% of peptide from the
PLGA nanoparticles over a period of 10–15 days with an initial burst release of 33.6 ± 2.8%
in 3 days. The nano-enabled PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel system demonstrated a sustained
release of 70.6 ± 1.98% peptide over 60 days. However, peptide release from nanoparticles
(NP) embedded in the PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel was much slower in comparison
to NP embedded in PEG-PCL-PEG. It was observed that 50% of peptide release from
NP/PEG-PCL-PEG and NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU was at 9.5 and 19.2 days, respectively.
In the case of NP/PLU hydrogel, 50% peptide release occurred before the 5th day of
incubation.
Peptide release from the NPs was best described by the Higuchi model (R2 = 0.948),
indicating release of peptide from the NP matrix as a square root of time-dependent pro-
cess based on Fickian diffusion. The Higuchi model also described release of the peptide
from PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG (R2 = 0.9201, R2 = 0.9267 and R2 = 0.8482,
respectively). Following incorporation of the NPs into the hydrogels, peptide release
followed the Higuchi model for NP/PLU (R2 = 0.8993) and the Korsmeyer–Peppas model
for NP/PEG-PCL-PEG and NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU (R2 = 0.9615 and R2 = 0.9778, re-
spectively). When examining the release mechanism in accordance with the n value of
the Korsmeyer–Peppas model, Fickian release was the dominant mechanism for both the
NP/PLU system (n = 0.3294) and the NP/PEG-PCL-PEG system (n = 0.221), whereas an
anomalous/non-Fickian diffusion was observed from the NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU system
(n = 0.4711) indicating a combination of both diffusion of peptide through the polymer and
ultimate dissolution/erosion of the polymer.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
14 of 19
Figure 7. (a) Plot depicting the in vitro p11 peptide release from PLGA nanoparticles, Pluronic hydrogel,
PLU/PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel, PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel, nanoparticle-loaded PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel
and nanoparticle-loaded PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel at 37 ◦C, in PBS for a period of 60 days. (b)
SDS–PAGE results of p11 peptide in vitro release profile (Lane 1, marker; Lane 2, 5days; Lane 3, 10 days;
Lane 4, 20 days; Lane 5, 35 days; Lane 6, 45 days; Lane 7, 55 days; Lane 8 control p11 peptide.
Further, the stability/integrity of the released peptide was conﬁrmed using Tris-Tricine
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. According to Figure 7b, the band for the control p11
peptide (Lane 8) with a molecular weight of 721 Da appeared below the lowest protein
marker position 1060 Da (Lane 1). The band for all p11 peptides released from the 5th
day to 55th day can be visualised at the same level from Lane 2–7. Lane 2 and 3 showed
very faint bands because of the lower amount of peptide released at the 5th and 10th day.
From these bands it is clearly evident that the protein released was stable even after 55 days
of incubation.
3.4. Biocompatibility Evaluation of the Nano-Enabled Thermogel System
The biocompatibility of PLGA nanoparticles, 25% w/v of PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG, PEG-
PCL-PEG/PLU and NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel was investigated using retinal
pigment epithelial cells (RPE-1). An indirect toxicity study was carried out via MTT assay.
The release media of all the different formulations after 30 days and 60 days were analysed.
After 24 h of incubation with the released medium, no signiﬁcant cell toxicity was observed
(p > 0.05). The viability in the control well was recorded as 98.9 ± 2.1%. In the case of all
the formulations studied, the cell viability was in the range of 94–98%, which conﬁrms the
biocompatibility of the hydrogel system (Figure 8a).
3.5. Haemolytic Activity of the Nano-Enabled Thermogel System
A red blood cell haemolysis assay was performed to determine the intensity of ocular
irritation caused by the developed NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU as well as the individual
components, namely NP alone, PLU, PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU. It was
evident from Figure 8b that the nanoparticles alone as well as other hydrogel systems
did not evoke signiﬁcant levels of haemolysis as compared to Triton × 100, which gave
approximately 100% haemolysis. Polyethylene glycol was used as the negative control and
showed 1.1 ± 0.99% haemolysis which is comparable with all the samples analysed tested
(1.2–1.5%). As per the reported criteria for blood damage provided in the ASTM E2524-08
standard, a percentage of haemolysis <5% was considered as normal [37].

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
15 of 19
Figure 8. (a) Assessment of percentage cell viability after incubation with 30 days and 60 days release
medium using MTT assay. (b) Analysis of haemolytic potential of different hydrogel systems and
PLGA nanoparticles. Inset: Representative photograph showing no signiﬁcant haemolysis in the
hydrogel systems and PLGA nanoparticles in comparison to positive control (Triton × 100).
4. Discussion
Since the eye is a sequestered tissue compartment, the direct delivery of therapeutic
agents is always advantageous over systemic administration with regards to the bioavail-
ability and side effects [38]. Even though intravitreal injections of anti-VEGF molecules
can circumvent most of the disadvantages of other administration routes, for angiogenesis-
related posterior segment ocular afﬂictions, repeated weekly injections could potentially
instigate the development of threatening complications such as haemorrhage and retinal
detachment, and eventually cause blindness [39]. Moreover, since VEGF is a survival
factor of normal newly formed retinal vessels, the targeting of VEGF will affect their
normal growth [11]. This study focused on an anti-angiogenic hexapeptide, having the
PDZ binding motif (Ser-Asp-Val) possessing high afﬁnity to alpha v beta 3 (αvβ3) integrin
molecules whose anti-angiogenic effect has been already studied and established using
human endothelial cells. Bang et al. [14] observed that the peptide can easily be taken up
by the endothelial cells via αvβ3 integrins and resulted in a bFGF-mediated suppression
of endothelial cell proliferation through mitogen-activated protein kinase in addition to
p53-mediated apoptosis associated with caspase activation.
FTIR spectra of the PEG-PCL-PEG copolymer revealed all the characteristic peaks of
PEG (1104 cm−1 and 1243 cm−1) and PCL (1733 cm−1) components [18,25,26]. Consistent
with previous reports by Gong et al. [18,25], 1H-NMR spectroscopy conﬁrmed the formation
of PEG-PCL-PEG triblock polymer.
It has been previously highlighted that the PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel demonstrates
thermosensitivity and biodegradability and could be employed as an organic solvent-free
injectable controlled drug delivery system [18,25–27]. Temperature-dependent sol-gel
conversion of the native PEG-PCL-PEG and a blend of PEG-PCL-PEG/Pluronic were
studied in comparison to the Pluronic hydrogel using the tube inversion method and
rheological studies [40]. The mechanism of gel formation for Pluronic as well as PEG-PCL-
PEG hydrogel has been previously reported [41]. As the concentration of the polymer
increased, the time required for gelation decreased. In this study, 25% PEG-PCL-PEG was
selected as the preferred concentration based on the ease of preparation. Incorporation of
25% PLU with PEG-PCL-PEG further increased the modulus of the system and decreased
the time required for gelation. Sol-gel conversion windows of 29 ◦C–45 ◦C and 32 ◦C–47 ◦C
were observed in the case of PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU, respectively, in
comparison to the lower sol-gel transition window (26 ◦C–39 ◦C) for PLU. The results
conﬁrmed the feasibility of the PEG-PCL-PEG-based hydrogel for in vivo application.

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
16 of 19
The PLGA nanoparticle possessing an average particle size 128.4 nm and an encapsu-
lation efﬁciency of 63.7% was identiﬁed as most favourable for incorporation within the
thermogel. Further in vitro release studies of PLGA nanoparticles showed a controlled
release of p11 peptide (80%) over a period of 15 days. However, NP-embedded PEG-
PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU achieved further enhanced sustained release of the
peptide from PLGA nanoparticles (70% over a period of 60 days) in comparison to PLU.
The Korsmeyer–Peppas model best described drug release from the NP/PEG-PCL-PEG
and NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU system. The Korsmeyer–Peppas model is also known as the
“Power law”, describing drug release from a polymeric system, and describes some release
mechanisms simultaneously, such as the diffusion of water into the matrix, swelling of the
matrix and dissolution of the matrix.
These results are in agreement with swelling studies as well as rheological analysis
for all the thermogels. Results from swelling studies revealed no signiﬁcant difference in
the swelling ratio between PEG-PCL-PEG and PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU thermogels analysed,
which indicates the stability of the hydrogel for a prolonged duration. Pluronic gel showed
more rapid swelling. The PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU thermogel possessed the highest G’, thus
resulting in a “stiffer” matrix, which further reduced diffusion of nanoparticles and peptide
from the system. Thus, release of nanoparticles as well as peptide from the hydrogel system
is proposedly primarily due to diffusion through the gel matrix, with minimal swelling
and ultimate erosion of the hydrogel, which was conﬁrmed by the kinetic models and
release mechanisms described. In addition, the rate of hydrolytic degradation of PCL is re-
duced [26], which further supports diffusion mediated release. The temperature-dependent
degradation proﬁle was studied by Gong et al. [18] who reported that approximately 43%
polymer degradation occurred over a period of 49 days. During swelling studies, it was
reported that the height of the gel increased and then decreased to zero, which indicated
the complete degradation of the gel [18]. In contrast, the gel system reported herein did
not show notable ﬂuctuations in gel height, indicating a very low swelling ratio that in
turn led to the sustained release of peptide from the system for a period of 60 days. There
are various factors determining the release of matrix-embedded drugs. However, the drug
liberation and diffusion from a matrix into the already diffused medium present in the
matrix and the transport of a drug from the matrix medium into the external medium
are the two major determinants of drug release kinetics. Conversely, the scenario is very
different from the nano-enabled hydrogel system, where both the nanoparticle wall and
the carrier gel matrix impede the release of drug. Initial peptide release would purportedly
be from the outer surface of the hydrogel. In this study it was found that up until the 5th
day, the amount of peptide released from NP/PEG-PCL-PEG was more or less similar to
that from the nanoparticle alone, which could be due to the nanoparticle release from the
outer surface of hydrogel. Thereafter, the release rate decreased due to the matrix effect. In
addition, more sustained release of peptides from the NP/PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel is
attributed to its more viscous nature in comparison to NP/PEG-PCL-PEG.
With reference to AMD treatment with anti-VEGF therapy, referring to aﬂibercept
(Eylea™), initial injection frequency is every 4 weeks for 3 months. After three once-
monthly loading doses, maintenance doses may be administered every 2 months. After
1 year of effective therapy, patients may be treated with one dose every 12 weeks. With
regard to treatment with ranibizumab (Lucentis™), treatment involves three once-monthly
loading doses and maintenance doses may be administered every 1 month [7]. No compara-
tor therapies exist on the market for the delivery of p11 peptide for ophthalmic applications;
however, as the nano-enabled PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel system demonstrated a sustained
release of 70.6 ± 1.98% peptide over 60 days (2 months), the system could be a potential
alternative regimen to the regimens discussed for anti-VEGF therapies.
Gong et al. [27] evaluated the acute toxicity of the PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel using
BALB/c mice following intrapleural, intraperitoneal or subcutaneous administration and
reported a lack of toxic response and histopathological changes. The in vivo gel formation
and degradation were also evaluated following intraperitoneal and subcutaneous adminis-

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
17 of 19
tration. Further, Peng et al. [30] evaluated the ophthalmic potential of the PEG-PCL-PEG
hydrogel for application following glaucoma ﬁltration surgery. Their intracameral injection-
implanted drug carrier was developed for inhibition of the formation of postoperative
scarring and evaluated in a rabbit eye model. They reported a lack of corneal abnormalities
and other ocular tissue damage, while sustained release of the anti-VEGF agent inhibited
neovascularisation and scar formation. Overall, this highlighted the potential safety of the
hydrogel for application in the biomedical ﬁeld, speciﬁcally in ophthalmic applications. In
this investigation, biocompatibility and haemolysis studies further conﬁrmed the suitability
of the hydrogel system for maintaining the stability and providing sustained release of the
anti-angiogenic peptide, thereby improving the therapeutic effect. This study thus provides
a proof-of-concept of the anti-angiogenic effect of the developed injectable hydrogel system
for the potential treatment of retinal diseases.
5. Conclusions
In the present study, PLGA nanoparticles embedded within a PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU
thermosensitive hydrogel (nano-thermogel) system were synthesised and employed for
the stable and sustained delivery of an anti-angiogenic p11 hexapeptide. The optimised
PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU hydrogel was prepared and displayed a sol-gel transition at body
temperature. The ability of the hydrogel system to exist as a solution at lower temperatures
is advantageous for the preparation of protein/peptide-incorporated injectable systems
for in vivo applications. The hydrogel showed successful delivery of stable peptide in a
sustained manner when investigated over a period of 60 days. Non-cytotoxicity and non-
haemolytic behaviour of the hydrogel was predictive of the in vivo applicability. Moreover,
our results suggest that PLGA nanoparticles incorporated within a PEG-PCL-PEG/PLU in
situ forming gel are a promising candidate for sustained delivery of p11 peptide for treating
various angiogenic-related retinal diseases, as well as tumours. Future investigation in a
New Zealand albino rabbit model is required for establishment of the preclinical potential
of the p11 peptide and the nano-thermogel system.
Author Contributions: Conceptualisation, L.C.d.T., Y.E.C. and V.P.; methodology, L.C.d.T. and Y.E.C.;
validation, L.C.d.T., Y.E.C. and V.P.; formal analysis, L.C.d.T.; investigation, L.C.d.T.; resources, V.P.; data
curation, L.C.d.T.; writing—original draft preparation, L.C.d.T.; writing—review and editing, Y.E.C. and
V.P; project administration, Y.E.C. and V.P.; funding acquisition, V.P. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript, except for V.P. who passed away before submission.
Funding: This project was supported by the National Research Foundation of South Africa.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study is available in the article.
Acknowledgments: Viness Pillay passed away before the submission of the ﬁnal version of this
manuscript. Yahya Choonara accepts responsibility for the integrity and validity of the data collected
and analysed.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Steinkuller, P.G.; Du, L.; Gilbert, C.; Foster, A.; Collins, M.L.; Coats, D.K. Childhood blindness. J. Am. Assoc. Pediat. Ophthalmol.
Strabismus 1999, 3, 26–32. [CrossRef]
2.
Rahmani, B.; Tielsch, J.M.; Katz, J.; Gottsch, J.; Quigley, H.; Javitt, J.; Sommer, A. The cause-speciﬁc prevalence of visual
impairment in an urban population. The Baltimore Eye Survey. Ophthalmology 1996, 103, 1721–1726. [CrossRef]
3.
Bressler, N.M.; Bressler, S.B. Preventative ophthalmology. Age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmology 1995, 102, 1206–1211.
[CrossRef]
4.
Anderson, O.A.; Bainbridge, J.W.; Shima, D.T. Delivery of anti-angiogenic molecular therapies for retinal disease. Drug Discov.
Today 2010, 15, 272–282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
18 of 19
5.
Kim, L.A.; D’Amore, P.A. A brief history of anti-VEGF for the treatment of ocular angiogenesis. Am. J. Pathol. 2012, 181, 376–379.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Hynes, R.O. Integrins: A family of cell surface receptors. Cell 1987, 48, 549–554. [CrossRef]
7.
Prall, R.F.; Dahl, A.A. Exudative (Wet) Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) Medication, Drugs & Diseases: Ophthalmology.
2019. Available online: https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1226030-medication (accessed on 7 February 2020).
8.
Nishijima, K.; Ng, Y.S.; Zhong, L.; Bradley, J.; Schubert, W.; Jo, N.; Akita, J.; Samuelsson, S.J.; Robinson, G.S.; Adamis, A.P.; et al.
Vascular endothelial growth factor-A is a survival factor for retinal neurons and a critical neuroprotectant during the adaptive
response to ischemic injury. Am. J. Pathol. 2007, 171, 53–67. [CrossRef]
9.
Saint-Geniez, M.; Maharaj, A.S.; Walshe, T.E.; Tucker, B.A.; Sekiyama, E.; Kurihara, T.; Darland, D.C.; Young, M.J.; D’Amore, P.A.
Endogenous VEGF is required for visual function: Evidence for a survival role on Müller cells and photoreceptors. PLoS ONE
2008, 3, e3554. [CrossRef]
10.
Gerhardinger, C.; Brown, L.F.; Roy, S.; Mizutani, M.; Zucker, C.L.; Lorenzi, M. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in
the human retina and in nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. Am. J. Pathol. 1998, 152, 1453–1462.
11.
Alon, T.; Hemo, I.; Itin, A.; Pe’er, J.; Stone, J.; Keshet, E. Vascular endothelial growth factor acts as a survival factor for newly
formed retinal vessels and has implications for retinopathy of prematurity. Nat. Med. 1995, 1, 1024–1028. [CrossRef]
12.
Brooks, P.C.; Clark, R.A.; Cheresh, D.A. Requirement of vascular integrin alpha v beta 3 for angiogenesis. Science 1994, 26, 569–571.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Friedlander, M.; Theesfeld, C.L.; Sugita, M.; Fruttiger, M.; Thomas, M.A.; Chang, S.; Cheresh, D.A. Involvement of integrins alpha
v beta 3 and alpha v beta 5 in ocular neovascular diseases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93, 9764–9769. [CrossRef]
14.
Bang, J.-Y.; Kim, E.-Y.; Kang, D.-K.; Chang, S.-I.; Han, M.-H.; Bae, K.-H.; Kang, I.-C. Pharmacoproteomic analysis of a Novel
Cell-Permeable Peptide inhibitor of Tumor induced angiogenesis. Mol. Cell Proteome 2011, 10, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Das, S.; Suresh, P.K. Drug delivery to eye: Special reference to nanoparticles. Int. J. Drug Deliv. 2010, 2, 12–21. [CrossRef]
16.
Nguyen, Q.D.; Shah, S.M.; Haﬁz, G.; Quinlan, E.; Sung, J.; Chu, K.; Cedarbaum, J.M.; Campchiaro, P.A. A phase I trial of an
IV-administered vascular endothelial growth factor trap for treatment in patients with choroidal neovascularization due to
age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmology 2006, 113, 1522.e1–1522.e14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Prasad, A.; Schadlu, R.; Apte, R.S. Intravitreal pharmacotherapy: Applications in retinal disease. Compr. Ophthalmol. Update 2007,
8, 259–269.
18.
Gong, C.Y.; Shi, S.; Dong, P.W.; Kan, B.; Gou, M.L.; Wang, X.H.; Li, X.Y.; Luo, F.; Zhao, X.; Wei, Y.Q.; et al. Synthesis and
Characterisation of PEG-PCL-PEG thermosensitive hydrogel. Int. J. Pharm. 2009, 365, 89–99. [CrossRef]
19.
Lin, G.; Cosimbescu, L.; Karin, N.J.; Gutowskab, A.; Tarasevich, B.J. Injectable and thermogelling hydrogels of PCL-g-
PEG:mechanisms, rheological and enzymatic degradation properties. J. Mater. Chem. B 2013, 1, 1249. [CrossRef]
20.
Li, F.; Hurley, B.; Liu, Y.; Leonard, B.; Grifﬁth, M. Controlled release of bevacizumab through nanospheres for extended treatment
of age-related macular degeneration. Open Ophthalmol. J. 2012, 6, 54. [CrossRef]
21.
Shelke, N.B.; Kadam, R.; Tyagi, P.; Rao, V.R.; Kompella, U.B. Intravitreal poly(L-lactide) microparticles sustain retinal and choroidal
delivery of TG-0054, a hydrophilic drug intended for neovascular diseases. Drug Deliv. Transl. Res. 2011, 1, 76. [CrossRef]
22.
Short, B.G. Safety evaluation of ocular drug delivery formulations: Techniques and practical considerations. Toxicol. Pathol. 2008,
36, 49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Gao, H.; Yang, Y.W.; Fan, Y.G.; Ma, J.B. Conjugates of poly(DL-lactic acid) with ethylenediamino or diethylenetriamino bridged
bis(beta-cyclodextrin)s and their nanoparticles as protein delivery systems. J. Control Release 2006, 112, 301–311. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Lee, S.H.; Zhang, Z.; Feng, S.S. Nanoparticles of poly(lactide)-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol succinate (PLA-TPGS) copolymers
for protein drug delivery. Biomaterials 2007, 28, 2041–2050. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Gong, C.Y.; Qian, Z.Y.; Liu, C.B.; Huang, M.J.; Gu, Y.C.; Wen, Y.J.; Kan, B.; Wang, K.; Dai, M.; Li, X.Y.; et al. A thermosensitive
hydrogel based on biodegradable amphiphilic poly (ethylene glycol)–polycaprolactone–poly(ethylene glycol) block copolymers.
Smart Mater. Struct. 2007, 16, 927. [CrossRef]
26.
Gong, C.Y.; Dong, P.W.; Shi, S.; Fu, S.Z.; Yang, J.L.; Guo, G.; Zhao, X.; Wei, Y.Q.; Qian, Z.Y. Thermosensitive PEG-PCL-PEG
hydrogel controlled drug delivery system: Sol-Gel-Sol transition and in vitro drug release study. J. Pharm. Sci. 2009, 98, 3706–3717.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Gong, C.Y.; Wu, Q.J.; Dong, P.W.; Shi, S.; Fu, S.Z.; Guo, G.; Hu, H.Z.; Zhao, X.; Wei, Y.Q.; Qian, Z.Y. Acute toxicity evaluation of
biodegradable in situ gel-forming controlled drug delivery system based on thermosensitive PEG-PCL-PEG hydrogel. J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater. 2009, 91, 26–36. [CrossRef]
28.
Cuong, N.-V.; Hsieh, M.-F.; Chen, Y.-T.; Liau, I. Synthesis and Characterization of PEG–PCL–PEG Triblock Copolymers as Carriers
of Doxorubicin for the Treatment of Breast Cancer. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2010, 117, 3694–3703. [CrossRef]
29.
Azouz, H.; Dahmoune, F.; Rezgui, F.; G’ Sell. Full factorial design optimization of anti-inﬂammatory drug release by PCL–PEG–
PCL microspheres. Mat. Sci. Eng. C 2016, 58, 412–419. [CrossRef]
30.
Peng, R.; Qin, G.; Li, X.; Lv, H.; Qian, Z.; Yu, L. The PEG-PCL-PEG Hydrogel as an Implanted Ophthalmic Delivery System after
Glaucoma Filtration Surgery; a Pilot Study. Med. Hypothesis Discov. Innov. Ophthalmol. 2014, 3, 3–8.
31.
Geng, H.; Song, H.; Qi, J.; Cui, D. Sustained release of VEGF from PLGA nanoparticles embedded thermosensitive hydrogel in
full-thickness porcine bladder acellular matrix. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2011, 6, 312–320. [CrossRef]

Pharmaceutics 2021, 13, 176
19 of 19
32.
Adeyemi, S.A. A Novel Peptide-Enhanced Drug Delivery System for Squamous Cell Oesophageal Carcinoma. Ph.D. Thesis,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 2017.
33.
Nicolete, R.; dos Santos, D.F.; Faccioli, L.H. The uptake of PLGA micro or nanoparticles by macrophages provokes distinct in vitro
inﬂammatory response. Int. Immunopharm. 2011, 11, 1557–1563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Hwang, M.J.; Suh, J.M.; Bae, Y.H.; Kim, S.W.; Jeong, B. Caprolactonic poloxamer analog: PEG-PCLPEG. Biomacromolecules 2005, 6,
885–890. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Bea, S.J.; Suh, J.M.; Sohn, Y.S.; Bae, Y.H.; Kim, S.W.; Jeong, B. Thermogelling poly(caprolactone-b-ethylene glycol-b- caprolactone)
aqueous solutions. Macromolecules 2005, 38, 5260–5265.
36.
Kim, I.Y.; Yoo, M.K.; Kim, B.C.; Park, I.Y.; Lee, H.C.; Chou, C.S. Thermogelling behaviors of poly(caprolactone-b-ethylene
glycol-b-caprolactone) triblock copolymer in the presence of hyaluronic acid. J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Chem. 2008. [CrossRef]
37.
Choi, J.; Reipa, V.; Hitchins, V.M.; Georring, P.L.; Malinauskas, R.A. Physico chemical characterization and in vitro hemolysis
evaluation of silver nanoparticles. Toxicol. Sci. 2011, 123, 133–143. [CrossRef]
38.
Thrimawithana, T.R.; Young, S.; Bunt, C.R.; Green, C.; Alany, R.G. Drug delivery to posterior segment of the eye. Drug Discov.
Today 2011, 16, 270–277. [CrossRef]
39.
Geroski, D.H.; Edelhauser, H.F. Drug delivery for posterior segment eye disease. IOVS 2000, 41, 961–964.
40.
Patel, A.R.; Kulkarni, S.; Nandekar, T.D.; Vavia, P.R. Evaluation of alkyl polyglucoside as an alternative surfactant in the
preparation of peptide-loaded nanoparticles. J. Microencapsul. 2008, 25, 531–540. [CrossRef]
41.
Teles, H.; Vermonden, T.; Eggink, G.; Hennink, W.E.; de Wolf, F.A. Hydrogels of collagen-inspired telechelic triblock copolymers
for the sustained release of proteins. J. Control Release 2010, 147, 298–303. [CrossRef]