Research paper
Flow-through ultrasonic emulsiﬁcation combined with static micromixing
for aseptic production of microspheres by solvent extraction
Sergio Freitas, Beat Rudolf, Hans P. Merkle, Bruno Gander*
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), ETH Ho¨nggerberg, Zu¨rich, Switzerland
Received 23 December 2004; accepted in revised form 4 May 2005
Available online 11 July 2005
Abstract
Final sterilisation of drug-loaded polymeric microspheres is problematic as dry heat or steam sterilisation are not applicable, and
g-irradiation may result in radiolytic scission of the polymer chains, and potentially damage the bioactive compound. Therefore, aseptic
production is the method of choice to obtain a sterile product. A novel process for the production of microspheres is introduced based on the
principle of double emulsion–solvent extraction. The process uses a ﬂow-through ultrasonic cell for the preparation of the primary emulsion,
in combination with a static micromixer for the production of the double emulsion. Because of its small scale, the equipment is readily
accommodated in a laminar air-ﬂow cabinet or an isolator. Thanks to the low technical complexity and easy handling of the process, only
minimal manual interventions is required. Finally, the possibility for in-place cleaning and sterilisation makes the equipment and process
well suited for aseptic microsphere preparation. Microspheres were prepared from poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), and bovine serum
albumin (BSA) served as model protein for microencapsulation. The BSA-in-PLGA (w/o) emulsions produced by the ultrasonic ﬂow-
through cell exhibited mean droplet sizes of !700 nm. Further processing into microspheres of 15–40 mm mean diameter resulted in approx.
70% BSA encapsulation efﬁciency. Batch-to-batch reproducibility was excellent. Microsphere batches produced under aseptic conditions to
assure product sterility exhibited no microbial contamination when examined by a simpliﬁed sterility test. The presented technology offers
great potential for aseptic microsphere production for batch-sizes suitable, e.g. for clinical investigations. Complete validation of product
sterility would, however, demand more extended tests.
q 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: PLGA microspheres; Solvent extraction; Ultrasonic emulsiﬁcation; Flow-through sonication; Static micromixer; Aseptic processing
1. Introduction
Administration of biodegradable microspheres for drug
and antigen delivery is primarily via the parenteral route.
Thus, product sterility has to be assured. Standard
laboratory procedures yield microbiologically contaminated
particles [1,2]. Microbial contamination mostly originates
from human cutaneous ﬂora and non-sterilised equipment.
To yield a sterile product, two approaches may be followed:
(i) terminal sterilisation of the product or (ii) aseptic
manufacturing.
The most common matrix materials used to formulate
biodegradable microspheres for parenteral drug delivery are
poly(lactic acid), PLA, and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid),
PLGA. PLA and PLGA microspheres cannot be sterilised
by dry heat or steam, because of the low glass transition
temperature of these polymers, while the use of ethylene
oxide may result in toxic residues. Therefore, g-irradiation
remains the only acceptable sterilisation method. However,
it has been shown that g-irradiation causes radiolytic chain
scission resulting in polymer molecular weight reduction,
and thus alters drug release [1–3]. Moreover, damage to the
active principle may occur [2]. As a result, aseptic
microsphere manufacturing should be favoured over
terminal sterilisation of PLA and PLGA microspheres.
Very commonly, microencapsulation is based on the
so-called solvent extraction method. Lab-scale experiments
are frequently performed in a simple beaker/stirrer set-up,
which is unsuitable for scaling-up and aseptic manufactur-
ing as it involves a series of manual interventions [4,5].
European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
www.elsevier.com/locate/ejpb
0939-6411/$ - see front matter q 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2005.05.004
* Corresponding author. Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), ETH Ho¨nggerberg, Wolfgang-
Pauli-Strasse 10, 8093 Zu¨rich, Switzerland. Tel.: C41 44 6337312; fax:
C41 44 6331314.
E-mail address: bruno.gander@pharma.ethz.ch (B. Gander).

Although a vast number of modiﬁed processes have been
developed [6], only very few of them have been speciﬁcally
designed for aseptic microsphere preparation, with some of
them requiring specialised, cost-intensive equipment [7].
In this study, BSA-loaded PLGA microspheres were
prepared by means of a W1/O/W2-double emulsion solvent
extraction method [4]. A ﬂow-through ultrasonic cell for
the preparation of the primary W1/O emulsion was
combined with a static micromixer for the preparation of
the W1/O/W2-double emulsion. This equipment offers a
number of advantages with respect to aseptic microsphere
preparation, e.g. small scale, low complexity, moderate
cost
equipment
and
easy
handling,
cleaning
and
assembling. Therefore, the proposed technology appears
suitable for cost-efﬁcient aseptic production of drug-loaded
microspheres in amounts suitable, e.g. for use in clinical
studies. The prepared microspheres were characterised
with respect to particle size, drug loading and, for those
prepared under aseptic conditions, for absence of microbial
contamination.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Uncapped 35 kDa poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid), PLGA
(Resomerw RG503H) was purchased from Boehringer-
Ingelheim (Ingelheim, Germany). Bovine serum albumin
(BSA, fraction V) was from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland).
Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA, Mowiolw 4-88) and polysorbate
20, used as dispersion stabilisers, were obtained from
Kuraray Specialities (Frankfurt/M., Germany) and Ha¨nseler
(Herisau, Switzerland), respectively.
2.2. Equipment and process
BSA-loaded PLGA microspheres were prepared using
a recently developed micromixer-based double-emulsion
solvent extraction method [8]. The equipment comprises
three serially connected subunits (Fig. 1). First, an
aqueous solution of BSA (W1) and a solution of PLGA
Fig. 1. Schematic overview of the microsphere preparation process, consisting of three main steps: (i) W1/O pre-emulsiﬁcation, (ii) W1/O emulsion
homogenization, and (iii) W1/O/W2 double emulsion formation. The numbers (1)–(6) indicate the sampling points for sterility testing (see text for details).
Fig. 2. Design of the ultrasonic ﬂow-through cell for the contact-free preparation of the W1/O emulsion.
S. Freitas et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
182

in an organic solvent (O), both fed by syringe pumps, are
pre-mixed in a 1-ml rubber-sealed glass cell by means of
a magnetic stirrer. Second, the resulting coarse W1/O-
emulsion is transported into a ﬂow-through ultrasonic cell
(Dmini250, Dr Hielscher, Teltow, Germany; Fig. 2) for
homogenisation. The homogenised emulsion is further
transported to a 3 ml rubber-sealed glass receptacle used
as expansion vessel to decouple the W1/O-emulsiﬁcation
from the following process step. Third, the W1/O-
emulsion is further emulsiﬁed in an aqueous extraction
ﬂuid (W2) using a static micromixer (SSIMMAg40T35,
Institut fu¨r Mikrotechnik Mainz (IMM), Mainz, Germany;
Fig. 3A). The resulting W1/O/W2 double emulsion is
collected in a glass vessel and stirred gently. Upon
extraction of the polymer solvent into the extraction ﬂuid
W2, solid microspheres with encapsulated BSA are
formed.
The working principle of the ultrasonic cell was
described in detail elsewhere [9,10]. Brieﬂy, the cell
consists of a glass tube, through which the emulsion is
transported. The glass tube is inserted into a steel mantle,
which is excited by an attached 20 kHz-sonotrode (Fig. 2).
The open space between the glass tube and steel mantle is
ﬁlled with pressurised water (minimum 5 bar) for trans-
mission of the sound waves from the mantle to the glass
tube. Inside the glass tube, cavitation occurs resulting in
emulsion droplet break-up. The power consumption of the
high frequency generator driving the ultrasonic transducer
was recorded, and the sonication time was calculated from
the volume of the glass tube (0.53 ml) divided by the
emulsion ﬂow rate.
The
static
micromixer
for
preparing
the
double
emulsion is described in detail elsewhere [8]. In brief,
the
mixer
consists,
in
essence,
of
an
array
of
interdigitated 40 mm-wide channels, alternately fed from
opposite sides with the two ﬂuids to be mixed (Fig. 3B).
In the middle of the channel array, the two ﬂuids are
discharged through a 60 mm-wide outlet slit machined
into the mixer housing’s cover plate, which yields a
stream of alternating ﬂuid micro-lamellae. The lamellae
of
the
more
slowly
ﬂowing
ﬂuid
disintegrate
into
droplets (Fig. 3C) [11]. The size of the droplets can be
readily controlled by varying the ﬂow velocities of the
two ﬂuids [8].
2.3. Microsphere preparation
PLGA was dissolved in dichloromethane (DCM) or ethyl
formate (EF) at 6% (w/w) (O) and BSA in PBS at 5% (w/w)
(W1). The two solutions were processed by the ultrasonic
cell as described above. The portion of W1/O emulsion
discharged from the ultrasonic cell during the ﬁrst 5 min of
processing was discarded to let the process equilibrate.
Aqueous 0.5% (w/w) solutions of PVA or polysorbate 20
were used as extraction ﬂuids (W2) for DCM and EF,
respectively. Flow rates were set at 4, 45 and 360 ml/h for
the W1-, O- and W2-phases, respectively. The dispersion of
nascent microspheres discharged from the micromixer was
collected in a glass vessel pre-ﬁlled with 500 ml of
extraction ﬂuid and stirred gently for 30 (EF) or 120 min
(DCM) for further hardening. The microspheres were
collected over a 0.2 mm pore-size ﬁlter, washed with
50 ml of de-ionised water and dried at 20 mbar and room
Fig. 3. Static multilamination micromixer for the preparation of the
W1/O/W2 double emulsion. (A) Mixer with dismantled inlay. The inlay
contains an array of microchannels. (B) SEM close-up of the microchannel
array. (C) Principle of droplet formation from ﬂuid lamellae upon transition
of two ﬂuids from the channel array to the outlet slit in the mixer housing’s
top part. (A and B) with kind permission of the Institut fu¨r Mikrotechnik
Mainz (IMM).
S. Freitas et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
183

temperature for 24 h. For each set of preparation
parameters, three microsphere batches (400–500 mg/batch)
were prepared and analysed.
2.4. Size distribution of the W1/O emulsion droplets
and the ﬁnal microspheres
Samples of the W1/O emulsions were taken from the
expansion vessel placed between ultrasonic cell and
micromixer, diluted 250-fold with DCM saturated with
water, and analysed by laser light scattering (Mastersizer X,
Malvern, Worcestershire, UK) using the Mie diffraction
model. The refractive indices of the BSA solution and
diluted polymer solution were approximated by those of
water (nDZ1.333) and DCM (nDZ1.424), respectively.
The emulsion droplet size distributions are presented in the
volume-weighted mode and characterised by the mean
diameter calculated from the volume-moment average of
the size distribution, D[4,3].
Dispersions of the microspheres in the extraction ﬂuid
were also analysed by laser light scattering, however, with
the Fraunhofer model being used for raw data analysis, as
the microspheres had diameters above 5 mm, considered as
critical for this calculation model. Further, the dried
microspheres
were
analysed
by
scanning
electron
microscopy (Hitachi S-700, Nissey Sangyo, Rattingen,
Germany) after having placed the particles on double-
sided adhesive tape and coated with 6 nm of platinum
(planar magnetron sputter-coater MED 010, Bal-Tec,
Balzers, Liechtenstein).
2.5. Protein content in the microspheres
The BSA content in the microspheres was quantiﬁed as
described elsewhere [8]. Brieﬂy, samples of 40 mg of dried
microspheres were dissolved in DCM. BSA was separated
from the dissolved polymer by ﬁltration over a 0.2 mm pore-
size regenerated cellulose ﬁlter. After elution of the protein
from the ﬁlter into PBS, the resulting solution was analysed
ﬂuorimetrically. The encapsulation efﬁciency was expressed
as the ratio of the amount of BSA extracted from the
microspheres to the amount of BSA employed for their
preparation.Each microsphere batch wasassayed induplicate.
2.6. Aseptic microsphere production and sterility testing
To evaluate the feasibility of the described technology
for aseptic manufacturing, a number of microsphere batches
were prepared under aseptic conditions and tested for
sterility.
Syringes, pre-mixing cell, expansion vessel, glassware,
tubing, as well as the dismantled micromixer and the glass
tube of the ultrasonic cell (Fig. 2) were steam-sterilized,
while the remaining parts of the equipment were surface-
disinfected with 70% ethanol. The equipment was
assembled in a laminar air-ﬂow cabinet and ﬁnally purged
with 70% ethanol.
The BSA and PLGA solutions were sterile-ﬁltered over
0.2 mm cellulose acetate and PTFE ﬁlters, respectively, while
the PVA and polysorbate solutions (extraction ﬂuids) were
steam-sterilised at 121 8C and 2 bar for 15 min. For
validation of the sterilisation methods, all solutions involved
in the process were loaded with a deﬁned bioburden of 1:1-
mixtures of Bacillus subtilis and Candida albicans. Volumes
of 10 ml of both BSA and PLGA solutions were separately
loaded with 7!106 CFU/ml of the microbial mixture to
achieve a bioburden of 107 CFU/cm2 for sterile ﬁltration on
7 cm2 cross-section membrane ﬁlters. Typically, 10 ml of
PLGA solution was used to produce one microsphere batch.
The extraction ﬂuid was loaded with 106 CFU per 100 ml of
the microbial mixture. All contaminated solutions were
found to be sterile after sterile ﬁltration or steam sterilization
(for sterility testing method see below).
During microsphere production, sterility tests were
performed with the BSA and PLGA solutions, the extraction
ﬂuid (Fig. 1, sampling points (1)–(3)), the W1/O emulsion
(4), the hardened microspheres (5) and the extraction ﬂuid
waste (6). Aliquots of the BSA solution (5 ml), the extraction
ﬂuid, and the extraction ﬂuid waste (25 ml each) were each
mixed with casein-peptone-soypeptone (CASO) broth,
incubated for 24 h at ambient conditions, and ﬁltered using
a Milliﬂex 100 system (Millipore, Massachusetts, USA). The
Milliﬂex ﬁlters were incubated with tryptic soy broth (TSB)
at 30–35 8C for 14 days to test for bacterial growth, and at
20–25 8C for 14 days to test for growth of yeast and moulds.
The ﬁlters were checked daily for colony growth. The PLGA
solution was tested by ﬁltering ﬁrst over a sterile 0.2 mm
regenerated cellulose ﬁlter, then re-hydrating the ﬁlter [12],
and incubating it in CASO broth for 24 h. Then, the broth
was further processed as described above. Samples of the
W1/O-emulsion were diluted (1:6, v/v) in sterile ethyl
formate and processed analogously to the PLGA solution.
The microspheres dispersed in the extraction ﬂuid were
collected on a sterile 0.2 mm cellulose acetate ﬁlter. One
portion of the collected particles was mixed with CASO
broth, incubated for 24 h, and the broth/particle-mixture was
further processed using the Millipore system as described
above. Another portion was dissolved in 5 ml of sterile EF
and processed further as described for the PLGA solution.
Positive controls were performed by direct incubation of
the test bacteria and yeast (88 CFU of each) in TSB. The
controls showed colony growth after 3 days of incubation.
Sterility and control tests were carried out in triplicate.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Process and microsphere characteristics
Pre-mixing of the BSA solution in the PLGA-solution
producedaqueousdropletsofasizeoftypically!200 mm[9].
S. Freitas et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
184

Pre-mixing was necessary to ensure that the composition
of the W1/O-feed entering the ultrasonic ﬂow-through
cell remained constant. Processing of the coarse pre-
emulsion by the ultrasonic cell reduced the mean droplet
size of the W1/O-emulsion to 620–670 nm (Table 1).
The droplet size distributions were monomodal and
relatively narrow with negligible batch-to-batch variations
(Fig. 4). The mean droplet size of the W1/O-emulsion
was 620 nm when the maximum sonication power of
30 W and a sonication time of approx. 40 s were used.
The droplet size increased slightly to 670 nm when the
sonication
power
was
lowered
to
23 W
(75%
of
maximum) or the sonication time shortened to 23 s
(Table 1). The latter was achievable by increasing the
ﬂow rates of the BSA- and PLGA-solutions by 2/3 from
respectively
4
and
45 ml/h
to
6.6
and
75 ml/h.
Exchanging the polymer solvent DCM by EF did not
inﬂuence the mean droplet size of the W1/O emulsion
(Table 1). Interestingly, the homogenisation of the W1/O-
emulsion in the ultrasonic ﬂow-through cell operated at
30 W during 40 s was as efﬁcient as a previously used
batch-wise processing with a 20 kHz ultrasonic probe
immersed in a 10 ml glass vessel and working at 50 W
for 20 s [8], which yielded W1/O-emulsion droplet sizes
of approx. 600 nm (data not shown).
Between the ultrasonic cell and the micromixer, an
expansion vessel had to be installed to decouple the ﬂuid
processing in the ultrasonic cell, which occurred at ambient
pressure, from the ﬂuid processing in the micromixer,
occurring at a slightly higher pressure due to the pressure
drop in the mixer. An increased pressure during the
ultrasonication of the W1/O-emulsion reduced the hom-
ogeneity of the emulsion, because of less efﬁcient
cavitation. Enhanced pressure increases the threshold for
the onset of cavitation, resulting in a decreased number of
cavitation events per unit volume of emulsion [13].
Microsphere formation in the micromixer occurred
through extruding the W1/O-emulsion through an array of
microchannels interdigitated with microchannels that were
fed from the opposite side by the extraction ﬂuid, W2, and
further through a ﬁne gap (the micromixer’s outlet slit).
Speciﬁcally, W1/O-droplets in the W2-phase formed by
friction forces exerted on the slowly ﬂowing W1/O-lamellae
by the nine-fold faster ﬂowing W2-lamellae. This W1/O-
droplet formation was accompanied by simultaneous
solvent extraction giving birth to microspheres of relatively
broad size distribution (Figs. 4 and 5), as found in previous
experiments with this type of mixer [8]. Scanning electron
Table 1
Characteristics of BSA-loaded microspheres prepared under different conditions of primary emulsion (W1/O) and double emulsion (W1/O/W2) formation. Data
are given as mean of three microsphere batchesGSD
Batch ID
Sonication
power (W)
Sonication time
(s)
Polymer solvent
Mean W1/O
droplet diameter
D[4,3] (mm)
Mean micro-
sphere diameter
D[4,3] (mm)
Theoretical drug
loading (%)
Encapsulation
efﬁciency (%)
DC1
30
39
DCM
0.62G0.05
36.4G0.8
5.6
73.0G3.6
DC2
23
39
DCM
0.67G0.03
38.9G1.7
5.6
72.5G1.2
DC3
30
23
DCM
0.67G0.05
30.9G0.3
5.6
67.1G2.5
EF1
30
40
EF
0.63G0.03
14.8G0.2
6.0
70.2G3.7
10
0
20
30
40
Differential volume fraction [%]
Diameter [µm]
0.1
1
10
100
Fig. 4. Size distributions of W1/O emulsions prepared by the ultrasonic
ﬂow-through cell (†††, nZ2) and of microspheres prepared from these
emulsions employing the static micromixer (—, nZ3). For further
preparation parameters see Table 1 (batch DC1).
Fig. 5. Scanning electron micrographs of PLGA microspheres prepared in
the processing unit illustrated in Fig. 1.
S. Freitas et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
185

micrographs revealed spherical microspheres with smooth
surfaces (Fig. 5). Batch-to-batch reproducibility was highly
satisfactory. Microsphere sizes were not affected by
the slight changes of the W1/O-emulsion droplet size
upon reduction of the sonication power (Table 1). The
reduction of the sonication time by increasing the ﬂow
rates of the W1- and O-solutions, in turn, necessitated to
increase the ﬂow-rate of the extraction ﬂuid, W2, from 360
to 420 ml/h in order to maintain stable emulsiﬁcation in the
static micromixer, resulting in a decrease of the microsphere
mean size from 36 to 31 mm. Microsphere sizes were
reduced substantially, i.e. from above 36 to 15 mm when
DCM was exchanged for EF. Both observations are in
agreement with earlier experiments using this type of
micromixer [8]. An explanation for the decreased micro-
sphere size with the use of EF may be the lower interfacial
tension between EF and the aqueous extraction ﬂuid, which
may have facilitated droplet break-up.
The microencapsulation of BSA by this continuous
process yielded encapsulation efﬁciencies (approx. 70%;
Table 1), which were similar to those obtained previously
with the same micromixer in combination with a batch-
mode preparation of the W1/O-emulsion using a standard
ultrasonic probe immersed in a glass vessel [8]. The
encapsulation efﬁciency was not signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by the small differences in the W1-droplet sizes (620–
670 nm) of the primary W1/O-emulsion, nor by the
exchange of polymer solvent, although EF produced
much smaller microspheres than DCM. For similar
experiments with EF, in which a standard ultrasonic
probe and
the micromixer were used, the attained
encapsulation efﬁciency was only 60% and varied largely
between the batches [8].
3.2. Aseptic production
The combination of ultrasonic ﬂow-through cell and
static micromixer offers speciﬁc advantages for aseptic
processing of drug-loaded microspheres. The entire
production unit is small and accommodates readily in a
laminar air-ﬂow cabinet or an isolator. The static
micromixer consists basically of only three parts, which
all can be heat-sterilised. The glass tube that conducts the
W1/O emulsion can be dismantled from the ultrasonic cell
and heat-sterilised, as it can be done with all the tubing.
Thanks to the low complexity of the equipment, the few
sterilised parts can be readily assembled in a Class 100
containment. The unit allows for continuous production
requiring minimum manual handling, which is a pre-
requisite for cost-efﬁcient aseptic production, and obviates
contact
between
the
processed
materials
and
the
environment.
All the samples taken for sterility testing from the
starting materials, intermediate and ﬁnal products were
free of microbial contamination. For sterility testing of
the microspheres, we ﬁrstly incubated them directly to
check for surface contamination. The absence of surface
contaminations was conﬁrmed by sterility testing of
the extraction ﬂuid waste. Secondly, the microspheres
were dissolved in EF, the obtained solutions sterile
ﬁltered, the ﬁlters re-hydrated and incubated to test for
microorganisms entrapped in the core. Although the
use of solvents like DCM for microsphere production
could have reduced the risk of core contamination by
killing vegetative forms of bacteria, yeasts and moulds,
the more resistant spores could have survived this
process [1,12,14].
We ﬁnally would like to emphasize that the primary
goal of this work was to obtain ﬁrst information on the
feasibility of aseptic microsphere preparation combining
the ﬂow-through ultrasonic cell and the multilamination
micromixer. We are well aware that the sterility tests
performed are by no means sufﬁcient to evidence product
sterility. Further work will have to include, for example,
conducting the process with media ﬁll and testing for
anaerobe microorganisms. In addition, the method used for
sterility testing of the interior of the microsphere needs
further validation work with respect to the microbial
toxicity of EF, which was employed to dissolve the
microspheres.
References
[1] A. Ge`ze, M. Venier-Julienne, J. Cottin, N. Faisant, J. Benoit, PLGA
microsphere bioburden evaluation for radiosterilization dose selec-
tion, J. Microencapsul. 18 (2001) 627–636.
[2] D. Mohr, M. Wolff, T. Kissel, Gamma irradiation for terminal
sterilization of 17b-estradiol loaded poly-(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)
microspheres, J. Control. Release 61 (1999) 203–217.
[3] A. Hausberger, R. Kenley, P.P. De Luca, Gamma irradiation
effects on molecular weight and in vitro degradation of poly(D,L-
lactide-co-glycolide)
microparticles,
Pharm.
Res.
12
(1995)
851–856.
[4] P. O’Donnell, J. McGinity, Preparation of microspheres by the
solvent evaporation technique, Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev. 28 (1997)
25–42.
[5] Y. Yang, T. Chung, X. Bai, W. Chan, Effect of preparation conditions
on morphology and release proﬁles of biodegradable polymeric
microspheres containing protein fabricated by double-emulsion
method, Chem. Eng. Sci. 55 (2000) 2223–2236.
[6] S. Freitas, H.P. Merkle, B. Gander, Microencapsulation by solvent
extraction/evaporation: reviewing the state of the art of microsphere
preparation process technology, J. Control. Release 102 (2005)
313–332.
[7] M. Tracy, Development and scale-up of a microsphere protein
delivery system, Biotechnol. Prog. 14 (1998) 108–115.
[8] S. Freitas, A. Walz, H.P. Merkle, B. Gander, Solvent extraction
employing a static micromixer: a simple, robust and versatile
technology
for
the
microencapsulation
of
proteins,
J. Microencapsul. 20 (2003) 67–85.
[9] S. Freitas, G. Hielscher, H.P. Merkle, B. Gander, Continuous contact-
and contamination-free ultrasonic emulsiﬁcation—a useful tool for
pharmaceutical development and production, Ultrasonics Sonochem.
12 (in press).
S. Freitas et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
186

[10] S. Freitas, B. Gander, N. Lehmann, Verfahren und Durchﬂusszelle zur
kontinuierlichen Bearbeitung von ﬂiessfa¨higen Zusammensetzungen
mittels Ultraschall. German Patent Application 102 43 837, 2002.
[11] V. Haverkamp, W. Ehrfeld, K. Gebauer, V. Hessel, H. Lo¨we,
T. Richter, C. Wille, The potential of micromixers for contacting
of disperse liquid phases, Fresen. J. Anal. Chem. 364 (1999)
617–624.
[12] F. Furkert, A validated test for sterility of microparticles made of
poly(lactide-co-glycolide), Pharm. Ind. 60 (1998) 905–907.
[13] O. Behrend, H. Schubert, Inﬂuence of hydrostatic pressure and gas
content on continuous ultrasound emulsiﬁcation, Ultrason. Sonochem.
8 (2001) 271–276.
[14] H. Toguchi, Sterility assurance of microspheres, J. Control. Release
(1999) 51–55.
S. Freitas et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 61 (2005) 181–187
187