

Citation: Ahmad, M.Z.; Sabri, A.H.B.;
Anjani, Q.K.; Domínguez-Robles, J.;
Abdul Latip, N.; Hamid, K.A. Design
and Development of Levodopa
Loaded Polymeric Nanoparticles for
Intranasal Delivery. Pharmaceuticals
2022, 15, 370. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ph15030370
Academic Editor: Dimitris Tsiourvas
Received: 29 January 2022
Accepted: 28 February 2022
Published: 18 March 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
pharmaceuticals
Article
Design and Development of Levodopa Loaded Polymeric
Nanoparticles for Intranasal Delivery
Mohd Zulhelmy Ahmad 1, Akmal Hidyat Bin Sabri 2, Qonita Kurnia Anjani 2
, Juan Domínguez-Robles 2
,
Normala Abdul Latip 3 and Khuriah Abdul Hamid 1,*
1
Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universiti Teknologi MARA Cawangan Selangor,
Puncak Alam 42300, Malaysia; zulhelmy88@gmail.com
2
School of Pharmacy, Queen’s University Belfast, Medical Biology Centre, 97 Lisburn Road,
Belfast BT9 7BL, UK; a.binsabri@qub.ac.uk (A.H.B.S.); qanjani01@qub.ac.uk (Q.K.A.);
j.dominguezrobles@qub.ac.uk (J.D.-R.)
3
Atta-ur-Rahman Institute for Natural Product Discovery (AuRINS), Universiti Teknologi MARA Cawangan
Selangor, Puncak Alam 42300, Malaysia; drnormala6351@uitm.edu.my
*
Correspondence: khuriah@uitm.edu.my
Abstract: Intranasal delivery is an alternative administration route to deliver levodopa (L-Dopa) to
the brain. This drug delivery route offers high drug permeability across the nasal epithelium and
rapid absorption into the central nervous system (CNS) while bypassing ﬁrst-pass metabolism. In this
study, we developed a library of polymeric nanocarrier systems for L-Dopa utilising poly(lactic-
co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) and chitosan. A total of three PLGA nanoparticles formulations (P1, P2
and P3) were prepared using a modiﬁed water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) solvent evaporation tech-
nique, while four formulations of chitosan nanoparticles (C1, C2, C3 and C4) were prepared by
ionic gelation method with sodium tripolyphosphate (TPP) as a cross-linking agent. Upon char-
acterising nanocarriers developed, it was discovered that C2 demonstrated the best results with
regard to droplet size (553 ± 52 nm), polydispersity index (0.522), zeta potential (+46.2 ± 2.3 mV),
and encapsulation efﬁciency (82.38% ± 1.63). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scan-
ning electron microscopy (SEM) further corroborated the particle size analysis highlighting that C2
displayed uniform particle size with spherical morphology. Additionally, X-ray diffraction analysis
(XRD) revealed that C2 was in an amorphous state while Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis
showed that there were no chemical interactions that might change the chemical structure of L-Dopa
within the polymeric nanoparticle matrix. Lastly, an in-vivo intranasal study in male Wistar rats
showed that the absorption of L-Dopa when formulated as chitosan nanoparticles was signiﬁcantly
enhanced (p < 0.05) by approximately two-fold compared to unmodiﬁed L-Dopa. Therefore, this
work illustrates that formulating L-Dopa into chitosan nanoparticles for intranasal delivery is a
potentially viable formulation strategy to improve the bioavailability of the drug for the treatment of
Parkinson’s disease.
Keywords: nanoparticles; chitosan; PLGA; bioavailability
1. Introduction
Levodopa (L-Dopa) is a medication used to treat Parkinson’s disease (PD), which
is a condition associated with low levels of a chemical called dopamine in the brain [1].
Unlike dopamine, L-Dopa is able to cross the BBB by utilising the large neutral amino
acid transporter (LAT1), which is expressed on the endothelial cells present on this border.
Upon crossing the BBB, L-Dopa is then regionally metabolised via decarboxylation to
dopamine [2]. L-Dopa can be administered orally, but less than 1% of the administered
dose reaches the CNS due to the rapid metabolism of dopa decarboxylase (DDC) and
catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT) that occurs during hepatic ﬁrst-pass metabolism [3].
Although the oral route offers a large surface area for absorption along the small intestine,
Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370. https://doi.org/10.3390/ph15030370
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/pharmaceuticals

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
2 of 19
hydrophilic drugs have a high risk of premature degradation due to rapid metabolism
within the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) coupled with hepatic ﬁrst-pass metabolism [4].
In order to overcome the issues associated with premature peripheral metabolism
of L-Dopa, the drug is frequently co-administered with the DDC inhibitor carbidopa.
However, co-administration of L-Dopa with carbidopa has been reported to induce a range
of unwanted side effects such as leg pain, ataxia and increased tremor, which may affect
the patient’s overall quality of life. In addition, oral administration of Parkinson’s drugs
is quite challenging as up to 80% of patients with the disease tend to suffer some form
of dysphagia, thus necessitating healthcare professionals to explore alternative routes of
administration [5]. Given this limitation, intranasal administration offers an alternative
delivery route for administering L-Dopa with acceptable bioavailability and avoiding
the need for carbidopa co-administration. The nasal epithelium is a highly permeable
monolayer that contains a highly vascularized submucosa conferring an optimal site for
drug absorption [6].
The interest in developing a suitable formulation capable of delivering L-Dopa via
intranasal is increasing. In addition, efforts have been made to improve the rate and extent
of drug transport across the membrane, which includes alteration of the lipophilicity of
the drug [7], reformulation of the drug to achieve higher water solubility [8], and delivery
of the encapsulated drugs within biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles [9]. In addition,
delivering a drug through the nasal route circumvents hepatic ﬁrst-pass metabolism, an
issue typically associated with oral administration of L-Dopa. Nevertheless, the intranasal
route suffers from the issue of mucociliary clearance along the nasal surface. Mucociliary
clearance or mucociliary transport is an innate self-clearing mechanism of the nasal airways
that will dismiss and expel any exogenous material via coughing and sneezing [10]. One
way to mitigate this natural biological response is to reformulate drugs into nanoparticulate
delivery systems with nose-to-brain targeting properties to enable targeted delivery of ther-
apeutic along the nasal passage. In order to achieve this, the nanoparticulate system ought
to exhibit mucoadhesive properties to help minimise the impact of mucociliary clearance.
This would enable longer residence time within the nasal mucosa to enable more rapid
uptake into systemic circulation hence improving the bioavailability of the drug. One of
the polymers that has been investigated in the manufacture of mucoadhesive drug delivery
systems is chitosan which is a cationic linear polysaccharide derived from chitin through
N-deacetylation [11]. Along with its mucoadhesive properties and its effects on epithelial
membranes permeability, chitosan nanoparticles are deemed a promising formulation for
intranasal delivery [12]. Although several papers detailing chitosan and PLGA nanoparti-
cles loaded with levodopa for intranasal delivery have been reported in the literature, most
of these systems typically present with low entrapment efﬁciency (≈40%) [13–15]. Such
low entrapment efﬁciency would result in considerable drug wastage during formulation
fabrication while necessitating high doses of nanoparticles to be delivered in order to
achieve a sufﬁcient therapeutic level within systemic circulation. Therefore, there is a need
to reﬁne and improve these nanocarriers for nose-to-brain delivery purposes.
In this study, we present the development, characterisation and evaluation of differ-
ent polymeric nanoparticles with the aim of enhancing the entrapment efﬁciency along
with the pharmacokinetic proﬁles of L-Dopa for intranasal delivery. The nanoparticles
were formulated using two types of polymers, PLGA and chitosan. PLGA nanoparticles
(formulation P1, P2 and P3) were prepared using a solvent evaporation technique, while
chitosan nanoparticles (formulation C1, C2, C3 and C4) were prepared by ionic gelation
method with sodium tripolyphosphate (TPP) as a cross-linking agent to entrap the pay-
load, L-dopa. A series of experiments were performed to characterise the particle size
distribution, zeta potential, morphology and drug content of the polymeric nanoparticles.
Moreover, an in vivo study was conducted to evaluate the pharmacokinetic proﬁle of L-
Dopa nanoparticles relative to drug solution following intranasal administration. Therefore,
the current work can serve as a basis for future clinical studies that could utilise the system

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
3 of 19
for the delivery of other antiparkinson drugs used to manage the disease in a simple and
non-invasive manner.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Materials
Low molecular weight chitosan (50–60 kDa), a mucoadhesive polymer, sodium
tripolyphosphate (TPP) was used as a cross-linking agent, and poly (lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA) with a ratio of 50:50 were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louise, MO, USA).
Tween® 80 and dichloromethane (DCM) were purchased from Fisher Scientiﬁc (Waltham,
MA, USA). Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and acetic acid were supplied from R&M Chemicals
(Essex, UK). Tetrahydrofuran (THF) HPLC grade and methanol were obtained from Merck
(Darmstadt, Germany). Triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA) was purchased from Scharlau (Sent-
menat, Spain). L-Dopa was supplied from Zhejiang Wild Wind Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.
(Dongyang, China) and used as a model drug. Deionised water (DI) was obtained from
Reservoir® Elga Water System (High Wycombe, UK). All other chemicals and solvents
were of analytical grade.
2.2. Preparation of L-Dopa Loaded PLGA Nanoparticles
L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles were prepared by the water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W)
modiﬁed solvent evaporation technique, as illustrated in Figure 1a [16]. We tried other
PLGA in our preliminary work, such as those with a ratio of 65:35 of lactide and glycolide;
however, the combination of L-Dopa and this polymer produced a bigger particle size as
compared to PLGA with a ratio of 50:50. Therefore, we decided to work with a 50:50 lactide
and glycolide PLGA polymer to develop L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles. Firstly,
10 mg of L-Dopa was dissolved in 10 mL distilled water to form an aqueous phase. Then,
3 different concentrations of PLGA (1.25, 2.5, and 5.0 mg/mL) were prepared in methylene
chloride before being homogenised with the drug containing aqueous phase at 22,000 rpm
for 30 s using Ultra-Turrax T25 homogeniser (IKA-Labtechnik, Staufen, Germany) to form
water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion. Following that, 25 mL of 0.2% PVA was added into the
emulsion and then homogenised for 3 min before being submerged in an iced water bath
containing ice cubes to form water in the W/O/W emulsion. The W/O/W emulsion
was then placed on a rotary evaporator (Buchi, Flawil, Switzerland) and evaporated
under reduced pressure until 3–4 mL of the suspension was obtained. Subsequently, the
nanoparticles were separated from the suspension by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for
15 min. Finally, the nanoparticles were lyophilised and stored until further analysis. The
drug entrapment efﬁciency (EE) was calculated by collecting and analysing the supernatant
as detailed in Section 2.4.2. This experiment was conducted in order to elucidate the effect
of PLGA composition on nanoparticle size and properties. Table 1 summarises the different
PLGA nanoparticles formulation manufactured.
Table 1. Formulation composition of L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles.
Formulation
L-Dopa (mg/mL)
PLGA (mg/mL)
PVA (% w/v)
P1
1
1.25
0.2
P2
1
2.50
0.2
P3
1
5.00
0.2
2.3. Preparation of L-Dopa Loaded Chitosan Nanoparticles
Chitosan nanoparticles were prepared using the ionic gelation method, which involved
an ionic cross-linking reaction of chitosan solution with sodium TPP in Tween® 80 as
a resuspending agent to avoid particle aggregation. The study was done at ambient
temperature under stirring, as previously reported (Figure 1b) [17]. Chitosan was dissolved
in 10 mL acetic acid at different concentrations of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4% w/v before 0.5% w/v
Tween® 80 was added to the solution. Following that, 10 mg of L-Dopa was added to the

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
4 of 19
chitosan solution. Finally, 0.1% w/v sodium TPP, a cross-linking agent, was introduced into
the chitosan solution to initiate cross-linking, which then led to the formation of L-Dopa
loaded chitosan nanoparticles. The solutions were then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for
30 min before being lyophilised for further analysis, while the supernatant was collected
and analysed for drug EE as detailed in Section 2.4.2. This experiment was conducted in
order to elucidate the effect of chitosan composition on nanoparticle size and properties.
Table 2 shows the formulation composition for L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles.
Figure 1. (a) Schematic illustrating how L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles were prepared via
water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) modiﬁed solvent evaporation technique. (b) Schematic illustrating
how L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles were prepared via ionic gelation.
Table 2. Formulation composition of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles.
Formulation
L-Dopa
(% w/v)
Chitosan
(% w/v)
Tween® 80
(% w/v)
Sodium TPP
(% w/v)
C1
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.1
C2
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.1
C3
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.1
C4
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.1

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
5 of 19
2.4. Characterisation of Nanoparticles
2.4.1. Particle Size Analysis
The particle size of the nanoparticles was analysed using Malvern Mastersizer Hydro
2000 (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK) particle size analyser. All formulations
were tested for the size and uniformity distribution. Firstly, the lyophilised nanoparticles
were dispersed in 10 mL distilled water. Then, the samples were loaded into the sample
chamber using the dropper in a dropwise manner until the laser diffraction of the instru-
ment reached 0.2 units of uniformity before the reading could be started. Measurements
were recorded and calculated using the Mastersizer software to obtain the mean value and
to ensure the consistency and reproducibility of the results.
2.4.2. Drug Entrapment Efﬁciency
The amount of L-Dopa entrapped within the nanoparticles was determined by mea-
suring the amount of non-entrapped drug in the supernatant recovered after centrifugation
by UV/Vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi Co., Tokyo, Japan). A complete UV/Vis scan was
performed to determine the wavelength for maximum absorption of L-Dopa. It was found
that L-Dopa displayed a maximum absorption wavelength at 280 nm. Thus, the drug
content was measured spectrophotometrically at 280 nm after a calibration curve was con-
structed. Supernatant collected from nanoparticles preparation was measured to determine
the amount of unbound drug. The EE was calculated based on Equation (1):
E (%) = Total amount o f drug −Total amount o f unbound drug
Total amount o f drug
× 100%
(1)
2.4.3. Zeta Potential
The zeta potential of the nanoparticles was measured by the Malvern Zetasizer 1600
Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). First, 1 mg of the nanoparticles was
resuspended in 10 mL of deionised water before measurement. The suspension was then
introduced into the folded capillary cell DTS1060 (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire,
UK) using a 3 mL syringe until the electrodes of the cell were fully immersed. This was
done carefully to mitigate any air bubble formation during sample loading. The cell was
then placed into the Zetasizer and equilibrated at 20 ◦C for 2 min prior to the measurement.
The values were recorded by calculating the mean value of 3 samples at 25 ◦C with a
detection angle of 90◦.
2.4.4. Morphology Study
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis of the prepared nanoparticulate
formulations was carried out to elucidate the morphology of the nanoparticles. Firstly,
nanoparticles were dispersed in distilled water to produce nanosuspension. A drop of
nanoparticles suspension was then placed on a carbon ﬁlm and coated with copper on a
TEM grid. Following that, TEM studies were performed at 200 kV using FEI TECNAI G2
20S (TWIN OR, USA. The TEM grid was ﬁxed into a sample holder and placed in a TEM
vacuum chamber and observed under low vacuum before TEM images were recorded.
In addition to TEM, the particle size of the nanoparticles was photographed using a
scanning electron microscope (SEM) for the morphology analysis. SEM (FEI Quanta 200,
Eindhoven, Netherlands) was used in this study due to its high resolution and simple
operation, employing a ﬁeld emission gun for the electron source. First, each of the
nanoparticle formulations was transferred onto a 20 × 20 mm glass slide and mounted on
an aluminium stub using double-sided carbon tape. The solution was slowly evaporated at
room temperature. The completely dried samples were coated with platinum by sputter
coating. The image was then captured on a digital microscope at the desired magniﬁcation.
The photographs were captured at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, and the mean particle
sizes of the nanoparticles were determined using Submicron Particle Sizer software.

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
6 of 19
2.4.5. X-ray Powder Diffraction Analysis
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was performed on formulation C2 because this for-
mulation demonstrated good particle size and uniformity while displaying the highest EE
relative to other formulations. Diffractograms obtained was used to determine the solid
state of the drug within the nanoparticles. A Ni-ﬁltered Cu Kα radiation over the 2θ range
of 10–90◦was used in the instrument setting. Samples were placed on a glass substrate, and
the experimental parameters were set at a voltage of 40 kV, current at 20 mA, and angular
speed at 4◦/min, respectively. The diffractograms of blank chitosan, L-Dopa, and L-Dopa
loaded chitosan nanoparticles (formulation C2) were recorded and compared.
2.4.6. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Analysis
FTIR analysis was employed to understand any excipient drug and interaction that
may arise within the nanoparticle formulation. For the FTIR study, only formulation C2
was analysed because this formulation demonstrated good particle size and uniformity
while displaying the highest EE relative to other formulations. The spectrum of FTIR was
recorded in the region of 4000 to 500 cm−1. The sample was mixed with potassium bromide
and KBr using mortar and pestle. The mixture of samples with KBr was then collected and
inserted into a pellet mould to be pressed into pellet form using a hand press. After the
sample and potassium bromide had been pressed, the thin pellet formed was then inserted
into the FTIR spectrometer. The background emission spectrum of the IR source was ﬁrst
recorded, followed by the emission spectrum of the IR source with the sample in place.
2.4.7. Instrumentation and Chromatographic Condition for the Analytical Method
The HPLC method for quantifying the amount of L-Dopa present rat plasma was
developed and validated with respect to linearity, recovery, speciﬁcity, accuracy, precision,
and stability. All parameters were within the limit as proposed by USFDA guidelines. The
proposed method has been published and was designed for rapid quantiﬁcation of L-Dopa
in rat plasma and [18]. Brieﬂy, the samples were treated with a deproteinising agent (DA)
consisting of acetonitrile:propanol (1:1) at the ratio of 2:1 (DA: samples) to remove the
protein. Then, the mixture was vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged again at 10,000 rpm
for 10 min. Prior to analysis, 50 µL of the clear supernatant was ﬁltered and injected
onto the HPLC system for chromatographic analysis. Blank plasma was also pre-treated
with DA as samples before being injected onto the HPLC system. Due to the potential
of photo-degradation of L-Dopa, all the works were performed in a dark environment
to reduce exposure to light and in a triplicate manner. Agilent HP 1200 coupled with
a diode array detector and evaporative light scattering detector (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used for analysis. Phenomenex reversed-phase C18 column,
Jupiter 5u C18 300 A with a particle size of 5 µm (150 mm × 4.6 mm i.d.) was used for the
chromatographic separation. The mobile phase comprised of a mixture of water containing
0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid and tetrahydrofuran with the ratio of (97:3) was used in this study.
The analysis was done using the isocratic technique with a ﬂow rate of 1.0 mL/min. Prior
to HPLC analysis, the mobile phase was ﬁltered through a nylon membrane with 0.45 mm
pore size to eliminate any contaminants. The eluent was monitored with a UV detector at
280 nm, which was the best wavelength for the detection of L-Dopa.
2.5. In Vivo Nasal Absorption Study
All animal studies performed were approved by the Committee on Animal Research
and Ethics guidelines at the Faculty of Pharmacy, Universiti Teknologi MARA. Male Wistar
rats, weighing 250–280 g, were fasted for 12 h prior to the experiments, but the rats had free
access to water. The rats were anaesthetised by intraperitoneal injection (i.p) of ketamine
and xylazine cocktail mixture with a ratio of 60:40 at a dose of 40 mg/kg. A surgical
operation for the in vivo nasal absorption study was employed in accordance with the
modiﬁed method outlined by Hirai et al. (Hirai, Yashiki, and Mima, 1981). Brieﬂy, the
rats were placed in the supine position, after which the trachea was exposed via surgical

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
7 of 19
incision to perform tracheal cannulation. The tracheal cannulation was performed in order
to maintain respiration. Following that, the trachea leading to the nasal cavity was ligated
to prevent the liquid from being exuded from the surgical incision. A polyethene tube was
inserted through the oesophagus to the posterior part of the nasal cavity. This step was
done to prevent drainage of the applied drug solution into the nasopharynx. After the
surgical operation, 20 µL (2.5 mg/kg BW) of sample solution (L-Dopa nanoparticles or
L-Dopa drug solution) was administered into the nasal cavity by a micropipette through
the nostril. The jugular vein was exposed, and blood samples (0.25 mL) were collected into
heparinised syringes at predetermined time intervals from 0 min until 240 min (0, 15 30, 60,
90, 120, 180, 240).
Samples were immediately centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min to obtain plasma
fraction, which was kept in ice until analysis. Concentrations of L-Dopa in rat plasma
were determined using the HPLC method detailed in Section 2.4.7. The peak concentration
(Cmax) and time to reach peak concentration (Tmax) of these compounds were determined
based on the L-dopa plasma proﬁles over time. The area under the curve (AUC) after nasal
administration of these compounds was calculated by the trapezoidal rule from zero to the
ﬁnal sampling time of 240 min.
The absolute bioavailability (BA) of L-dopa in the systemic circulation following
the intranasal administration was obtained by comparing the AUC value of intranasal
administration with the AUC of intravenous administration. The absolute bioavailability
of L-dopa chitosan nanoparticles was calculated as follows:
BA (%) = AUCintranasal × Doseintravenous
AUCintravenos × Doseintranasal
× 100%
(2)
Based on Equation (2), BA refers to absolute bioavailability, AUCintranasal is the area
under the curve following intranasal administration, Doseintravenous. is the dose following
intravenous injection, AUCintravenous. is the area under the curve following intravenous
administration, and Doseintranasal is the dose for intranasal administration.
2.6. Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism® version 8.0 (GraphPad
Software, San Diego, CA, USA). All experimental results are presented as means ± standard
deviation (SD) unless otherwise stated. An unpaired t-test was used for the comparison
of two cohorts. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for the comparison of
multiple cohorts. In all cases, p < 0.05 is used to denote statistically signiﬁcance, where
p-value outputs were 0.033 (*), 0.002 (**), <0.001 (***), and <0.0001 (****).
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Characterisation of Nanoparticles
3.1.1. Nanoparticle Size and Dispersity
L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles were formulated by using a modiﬁed W/O/W
solvent evaporation technique, while chitosan nanoparticles were manufactured by ionic
gelation. Both types of nanoparticle formulations were analysed for particle size and
uniformity. Figure 2a shows that increasing PLGA and chitosan concentration had an
impact on the size of the nanoparticle produced. With regards to PLGA nanoparticles, P1
(1.25 mg/mL) had the smallest particle size of 207 ± 15 nm, followed by formulation P2
(2.50 mg/mL of PLGA) and P3 (5.00 mg/mL of PLGA) with particle sizes of 739 ± 48 nm
and 941 ± 162 nm, respectively. Thus, these results are clearly indicating that there was an
increase in nanoparticle size from 200 nm to 940 nm when increasing PLGA concentration.
However, all the PLGA nanoparticles formulations showed the same polydispersity index
(PDI) (p > 0.05). Overall, these ﬁndings indicate that PLGA concentration had an effect on
the size but not on the PDI during the manufacture of these PLGA nanoparticles. These
results are in agreement with those found by Mohan and co-workers, who developed
PLGA-polyethylene glycol (PEG) nanoparticles using a solvent dispersion method for

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
8 of 19
enhanced drug targeting to the inﬂamed intestinal barrier [19]. This observation may be
attributed to the propensity of PLGA polymer to clump and coalesce with each other with
increasing polymer concentration as the nanoparticles are manufactured via the solvent
evaporation technique, thus producing a bigger particle size [20].
Figure 2. (a) Mean particle size (nm), (b) uniformity measured as polydispersity index (PDI) for each
formulation. (c) Effects of different polymer concentrations on the zeta potential and (d) encapsulation
efﬁciency of L-Dopa loaded with PLGA and chitosan nanoparticles. Results are expressed as the
mean ± SD, n = 3. Differences were calculated using one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post
hoc test, and deemed signiﬁcant at where p-value outputs were 0.033 (*), 0.002 (**), <0.001 (***) and
<0.0001 (****).
On the other hand, it can be seen that polymer concentration also had an impact on
the manufacture of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles. In contrast to PLGA, chitosan
concentration not only had an impact on the particle size of L-Dopa loaded chitosan
nanoparticles but also affected the PDI of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles. Figure 2a
showed that the smallest mean droplet size for chitosan nanoparticles was observed in
C2 (553 ± 52 nm), followed by formulation C3, C1, and C4 with the mean droplet sizes
of 737 ± 32 nm, 795 ± 33 nm, and 945 ± 29 nm, respectively. Although formulation
C2 was prepared using a higher chitosan concentration than C1, it presented a smaller
particle size compared to C1. This may be attributed to the low chitosan concentration
used in the manufacture of formulation C1 relative to C2. It has been reported that varying
chitosan concentration is a convenient way to tune the ionic cross-link density and swelling
properties of chitosan/TPP nanoparticles which ultimately affects the overall size of the
nanoparticle [21–23].

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
9 of 19
According to these results, it can be concluded that the ratio of sodium TPP and
chitosan concentration was optimal for achieving a complete reaction of sodium TPP and
chitosan during nanoparticle preparation [24]. However, the low chitosan concentration
used in formulation C1 results in excess TPP post-crosslinking which may deposit on
the surface of the nanoparticles resulting in an increase in a large nanoparticle relative to
C2 [25]. As the chitosan concentration increased to 0.3% w/v (C3) and 0.4% w/v with ﬁxed
TPP concentration, it is hypothesized that there was insufﬁcient TPP to fully cross-link the
chitosan polymer per nanoparticle. The presence of uncrosslinked chitosan within these
nanoparticles will exhibit a free primary amine group which can form hydrogen bonds
with water molecules within the aqueous phase. This hydrogen bond interacting will result
in nanoparticle swelling, which culminates in an increase in the hydrodynamic size of the
nanoparticle manufactured [26].
The polydispersity of chitosan nanoparticles, as shown in Figure 2b, exhibited a non-
linear behaviour with formulation C4 displaying the highest PDI (0.75 ± 0.04) followed by
formulation C3 (0.67 ± 0.02), formulation C1 (0.52 ± 0.02), and formulation C2 (0.43 ± 0.04),
respectively. It can be seen that chitosan nanoparticles manufactured at higher chitosan
concentration showed a higher PDI relative to formulations manufactured at low chitosan
concentration. This may be attributed to the interaction between sodium TPP and chitosan.
This phenomenon can be explained by the ease of polyanion dispersion within the chitosan
network at different polymer concentrations. At low chitosan concentration solution, the
polymer exists in an extended conformation due to the repulsion between the positively
charged amine groups. This extended conformation confers large spaces within the chitosan
network that enabled rapid and uniform dispersion of the polyanion, TPP. The uniformity
in TPP dispersion promotes a more homogenous inter- and intra-crosslinking between the
protonated amine groups and TPP anions, leading to the production of nanoparticles with
a more uniform size distribution. However, as the chitosan concentration increases, the
polymer undergoes inter and intramolecular chain entanglement [27]. This entanglement
reduces the intermolecular space available for TPP dispersion within the chitosan network.
This heterogeneous distribution of TPP polyanions within the chitosan network will lead
to an inconsistent degree of cross-linking between nanoparticles, which culminate the
production of nanoparticles with a more heterogeneous size distribution as shown by
formulation C3 and C4 [28–30].
3.1.2. Zeta Potential of Nanoparticles
Zeta potential is a vital parameter that is frequently used to evaluate the stability of the
nanoparticles and potential interaction between nanoparticles with mucosal membranes.
Nanoparticles with a zeta potential absolute value of 30 mV or above are considered to
have good stability with less propensity to agglomerate upon storage [31]. Figure 2c shows
the zeta potential values for both PLGA and chitosan nanoparticles. Zeta potential values
decreased with increasing PLGA concentrations from P1–P3. The highest zeta potential was
observed in formulation P1 (−48.6 ± 2.4 mV), followed by formulation P2 (−27.1 ± 2.1 mV)
and formulation P3 (−18.4 ± 2.1 mV). Moreover, all L-dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles
showed a negative zeta potential. These results are in agreement with those previously
reported, showing that PLGA nanoparticles tend to exhibit a negative zeta potential when
the nanoparticle is reconstituted as a nanosuspension [32,33]. The negative zeta potential
is attributed to the ionisation of the terminal carboxyl groups end chain on the PLGA
polymer [34]. However, the zeta potential of PLGA nanoparticles is not only affected by
the ionisation of the terminal carboxyl group, as the overall zeta potential is also affected
by the degree of PLGA coating around the nanoparticle, which in turn is governed by
the concentration of PLGA used in the manufacturing of the PLGA nanoparticles [35].
A previous study by [35] showed that high PLGA concentration could increase the coating
layers on the polymer surface and shield the charged carboxyl group on the surface
of the particles, thus reducing the overall negative zeta potential. Such ﬁnding is in
agreement with the results observed in the current study and those reported by Huang

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
10 of 19
and Zhang [20], where the zeta potential of PLGA nanoparticles decreased after increasing
polymer concentration.
For the L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles, formulation C2 showed the highest
zeta potential (+46.2 mV), followed by formulations C1 (+32.4 mV) and C3 (+31.5 mV),
which presented virtually the same values, respectively) (p > 0.05) and formulation C4,
which displayed the lowest zeta potential (+17.6 ± 1.7 mV). As zeta potential is an indicator
of the colloidal stability of nanoparticles, it is frequently suggested that nanoparticles
displaying zeta potential values greater than +25 mV or less than −25 mV typically exhibit
high degrees of colloidal stability [36]. Accordingly, formulation C2 exhibited the highest
colloidal stability. Moreover, the positive zeta potential exhibited by formulations C1–C4
is a cardinal feature of most chitosan-based nanoparticle systems that are fabricated from
ionic gelation [37,38]. Chitosan is a semisynthetic material manufactured through the
deacetylation of chitin and is comprised of glucosamine (deacetylated monomer) and
N-acetyl-glucosamine (acetylated monomer) monomers linked through β-,4 glycosidic
bonds. In contrast to PLGA, chitosan contains a lot of free primary amine group, which
under colloidal conditions may undergo ionization to form -NH3+ leading to an overall
positive zeta potential.
Nanoparticles exhibiting a positive zeta potential is highly desirable for intranasal
mucosal delivery as the positive charge may enhance transport of the protein across the
nasal epithelium via increasing the residence time of these nanoparticles in the nasal cavity
due to electrostatic interactions with the negatively charged sialic acid residues on mucosal
proteins [39]. Such observation contradicts the ﬁndings by other researchers, who found
that zeta potential was found to be directly proportional to the concentration of chitosan
used in the preparation of nanoparticles via ionic gelation [40,41]. In contrast, Zaki et al.
found that the chitosan concentration used in the preparation of nanoparticles did not
have a signiﬁcant impact on the overall zeta potential of the nanoparticles for medium and
high molecular weight chitosan [42]. However, in this study, we observed that as chitosan
concentration increased, the value of zeta potential was decreased. This is attributed to
the presence of a higher free amine group on the surface of the chitosan nanoparticle
when the formulations were manufactured at higher chitosan concentrations. When the
nanoparticles were reconstituted in deionized water post-puriﬁcation, the presence of the
free amine group will cause a rise in the pH of the aqueous media. The rise in pH will
cause the zeta potential of the chitosan nanoparticle to decrease, an observation that has
been already reported by other researchers [43,44]. As the pH of the reconstituting media
rise, less primary amine group will be ionized to form -NH3+, resulting in lower surface
charge on the nanoparticles culminating in an overall lower zeta potential.
3.1.3. Drug Entrapment Efﬁciency
L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles were prepared by the W/O/W modiﬁed solvent
evaporation technique [45]. Figure 2d showed that both formulations P1 (55.28 ± 1.13%)
and P2 (57.68 ± 0.53%) showed similar EE. However, formulation P3, which was manufac-
tured with the highest PLGA concentration, showed signiﬁcantly higher EE (59.65 ± 1.20%)
(p < 0.05). These results are in agreement with those found in previous studies done by Fu
and researchers [46,47]. Drug loading into nanoparticles via W/O/W modiﬁed solvent
evaporation technique is considered one of the most challenging methods in achieving
high drug EE [47,48]. Using this method, EE of nanoparticles and microparticles would
be dependent on the drug partition coefﬁcient between the internal and external phases
of the emulsion [49]. Therefore, the extent of drug loading is dependent on the rate of
nanoparticle solidiﬁcation. Zhu et al. have shown that a faster solidiﬁcation rate may to
some degree enhance the EE of the nanoparticle system [50]. In this study, it can be seen that
increasing PLGA concentration did, to some degree, improve the encapsulation efﬁciency
of the nanoparticulate system. This is because with increasing polymer concentration, the
rate of polymer precipitation and solidiﬁcation from the oil phase was enhanced under the
same temperature and shear strength [46].

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
11 of 19
L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles displayed higher EE in comparison with PLGA
nanoparticles. This could be explained by the quick cross-linking between sodium TPP
and chitosan, leading to a quicker nanoparticle formation and solidiﬁcation, resulting
in a higher EE [51]. For L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles, formulation C2, which
showed the smallest mean droplet size (553 ± 52 nm), exhibited the highest drug content
(82.38 ± 1.63%), followed by formulation C3 (75.73 ± 1.14%), formulation C1 (72.07 ± 1.21%)
and formulation C4 (70.84% ± 0.62%), respectively. This higher EE exhibited by formu-
lation C2 may be attributed to the quicker and higher degree of cross-linking between
chitosan and sodium TPP at this chitosan/sodium TPP ratio in comparison with the rest of
the formulations [52]. The high degree of cross-linking at this ratio of chitosan/sodium TPP
not only promoted smaller nanoparticle formation but also contributed to faster nanopar-
ticle solidiﬁcation, which is pertinent in mitigating the drug from partitioning out of the
nanoparticles and into the aqueous phase [24].
A further increase in the chitosan concentration (C2-C4) with the same sodium TPP
concentration resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in the drug EE (p < 0.05), as shown in
Figure 2d. This may be attributed to a lower degree of chitosan cross-linking when increas-
ing polymer concentration under the same sodium TPP concentration. The lower degree of
cross-linking led to a slower rate of nanoparticle formation, which in turn resulted in some
L-Dopa to partition out in the aqueous phase leading to a decrease in EE. L-Dopa loaded
chitosan nanoparticles displayed better EE than the ones made from PLGA. Following the
nanoparticle characterisation study, L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles were selected
over PLGA nanoparticles for further characterisation along with in vivo evaluation. This
is because the chitosan nanoparticles formulation displayed higher drug loading and en-
trapment efﬁciency relative to L-Dopa loaded PLGA nanoparticles. In order to further
elucidate the properties of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles, morphology studies were
conducted using TEM and SEM.
3.1.4. Morphology of L-Dopa Loaded Chitosan Nanoparticle Characterisation
TEM in tandem with SEM was used to study the shape, surface appearance, and
structural morphology of chitosan polymeric nanoparticles. TEM and SEM oictures of
L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles (C1–C4) are shown in Figure 3. All the performed
L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles presented a spherical shape with a smooth surface.
Nanoparticles in formulations C1 and C3 were spherical but displayed low size uniformity.
There was some degree of aggregations between the nanoparticles within the formulations
C1 and C3, resulting in the formation of different groups of clumped particulates, and in
some instances, these nanoparticles have coalesced into nanoparticles with larger diameters.
Moreover, both formulations, C1 and C3, presented almost the same particle size with an
average diameter of ≈750 nm. The aggregation of chitosan nanoparticles in formulation
C1 may be attributed to the presence of free sodium TPP, which is in excess of the reaction
between sodium TPP and chitosan. Under this condition, the presence of free sodium TPP
would bind to the surface of the nanoparticle and behave as a bridging ion, thus promoting
nanoparticle aggregation, as suggested by Huang and Lapitsky [53].
In contrast, formulation C2 showed a smaller particle size and more uniform size
distribution. These results are in agreement with those presented in Figure 2, indicating
that formulation C2 displayed the lowest PDI and the smallest average particle size out
of all four evaluated formulations. Additionally, nanoparticles from formulation C2 were
enclosed in a chitosan gel, unlike the rest of the chitosan formulations. It is suggested
that this gel structure confers mucoadhesive properties that enhance the residence time
of the formulation on the mucosal lining. Such properties are pertinent in enhancing the
absorption of the nanoparticles across the nasal mucosa [53].

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
12 of 19
Figure 3. (a) TEM image of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles for formulation C1–C4. Scale bar:
500,000 nm (b) SEM image of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles for formulation C1–C4. Scale bar
for respective image is embedded in the image.
Furthermore, it can also be seen from Figure 3 that formulation C4 displayed the
largest particle size, evidenced by the presence of large particles. Such poor uniformity in
particle size shown by formulation C4 is corroborated by the result displayed in Figure 2
that showed that this formulation displayed the highest PDI out of the four formulations
developed. The higher particle aggregation in the formulation C4 may be attributed to
the presence of additional chitosan layers on the nanoparticles when increasing polymer
concentration. The existence of these additional chitosan layers on the nanoparticles
also results in the presence of free -NH2 which have not been cross-linked with sodium
TPP during nanoparticle preparation. When the nanoparticles for these formulations are
reconstituted in deionised water post-puriﬁcation, the presence of these free -NH2 raises
the pH of the reconstitution media. The rise in pH has been shown by Huang and Lapitsky
to induce the aggregation of chitosan nanoparticles [53]. This was further conﬁrmed by the
work of Saini et al., who showed that with an increase in the pH, the charge on the chitosan
nanoparticle is reduced, resulting in poor colloidal stabilisation via electrostatic repulsion,
which induces nanoparticle aggregation [54].
Overall, the TEM and SEM images showed minimal nanoparticle aggregation in
formulation C2. This is because the ratio of ionic cross-linking agents, sodium TPP and
chitosan were at an optimal ratio to promote sufﬁcient polymer cross-linking with minimal
presence of free TPP and -NH2 on chitosan post-manufacture. The presence of a minimal
concentration of free TPP and unreacted -NH2 on chitosan helped mitigate nanoparticle
aggregation [53]. However, when the concentration of chitosan used was increased any
further, we observed large aggregations within the nanoparticle systems, as shown in
formulation C3 and C4, which could not be mitigated even though Tween® 80 was added
as a suspending medium to promote nanoparticle stabilisation [55]. This indicated that
the ratio of chitosan:sodium TPP played a pivotal role not only on the overall size and
EE of the system but ultimately on the stability of the nanoparticles. From the results
above, formulation C2 showed the smallest size and the best particle size distribution for
L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles. Therefore, formulation C2 was selected for further
characterisation using XRD and FTIR.

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
13 of 19
3.1.5. Powder X-ray Diffraction Analysis
XRD analysis was conducted on chitosan nanoparticle formulation C2 in order to
elucidate the solid state of the drug that is present within the nanoparticles. The X-ray
diffraction patterns for L-Dopa are presented in Figure 4a. The diffractogram showed
noticeable crystalline peaks at 2θ of 17.95◦, 18.40◦, 21.25◦, 22.75◦, 24.95◦and 25.90◦accord-
ingly with intensity ranging from 2000 cps to 4500 cps. The presence of these peaks at such
intensity are cardinal markers that conﬁrm the highly crystalline state of L-Dopa [56,57].

Figure 4. Physical characterisation of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles. (a) Diffractogram of
pure L-Dopa, blank chitosan nanoparticles and L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles. (b) FTIR
spectrum of pure L-Dopa, blank chitosan nanoparticles and L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles.
The XRD diffractogram of blank chitosan showed a typical amorphous diffractogram
without any apparent crystalline peaks. When the chitosan nanoparticles were loaded,
L-Dopa was present in an amorphous state, as evidenced by the absence of any crystalline
peak in Figure 4a. This suggests that the method of preparing the chitosan nanoparticle via
ionic gelation caused L-Dopa to change its state from crystalline to an amorphous state. The
amorphous state of the L-Dopa in chitosan nanoparticles may be attributed to the bulky
yet dense network structure of penetrating polymer chains cross-linked with sodium TPP
counterions that prevent the L-Dopa from recrystallisation [58]. Alternatively, the presence
of amine and hydroxyl groups on the chitosan polymer may form interaction via hydrogen
bonding and ion-dipole between the L-Dopa and the polymer that prevent drug molecules
from aggregating and recrystallising [59]. The presence of L-Dopa in an amorphous state is
highly desirable as the drug would have improved solubility that would promote faster
drug release from the nanoparticle upon administration.

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
14 of 19
3.1.6. Fourier Transform Infrared Analysis
FTIR analysis was performed to evaluate any potential interactions between L-Dopa
and blank chitosan nanoparticles within the samples (Figure 4b). The spectra for L-Dopa
exhibit peaks at 3183.59 cm−1, 1651.89 cm−1 and 1451.22 cm−1 which are characteristics
of the pure drug. The peak at 1651.89 cm−1 represents the di-substituted aromatic ring,
while the peak at 1451.22 cm−1 represents the O-H stretch from the carboxylic acid group
on the drug. Moreover, the peak at 3183.59 cm−1 indicates the amine group on the drug
molecule [57].
Blank chitosan nanoparticles showed characteristic peaks at 1375.44 cm−1, 1584.46 cm−1
and 3286.56 cm−1. The peak at 3286.56 cm−1 represents the amine group and O-H stretch-
ing on the biopolymer, as well as the intramolecular hydrogen bonds, while the peak at
1584.46 cm-1 corresponds to the N-H bending of the primary amine [60]. The peak at
1150.07 cm−1 can be attributed to the asymmetric stretching of the C-O-C bridge between
the repeating units within the chitosan biopolymer [61]. Moreover, the CH3 symmetrical
deformations were conﬁrmed by the presence of a band at 1375.44 cm−1 [61]. The FTIR
analysis revealed that L-Dopa peaks could be found in the IR spectrum of the L-Dopa
loaded chitosan nanoparticle samples. Additionally, no new peaks or peak shifts were
obtained, suggesting that no chemical reaction took place during the ionic gelation method
used to prepare the drug-loaded chitosan nanoparticles.
3.2. In Vivo Intranasal Delivery Study
Intranasal administration has garnered considerable attention among pharmaceutical
scientists as a potential route for achieving faster absorption with optimal bioavailability.
Indeed, the delivery of L-Dopa via the intranasal route would be of great advantage relative
to oral delivery as more than 80% of patients with Parkinson’s disease suffers dysphagia
at some point during the course of the disease [5]. In the current work, L-Dopa loaded
chitosan nanoparticles were prepared and characterised, followed by in vivo evaluation
in rats. Based on the characterisation study, formulation C2 was selected for in vivo
intranasal delivery as this formulation displayed the highest drug EE and zeta potential.
The positive charge on the nanoparticle may enhance the transport of the system across the
nasal epithelium via increasing the residence time of the nanoparticle in the nasal cavity.
Such extension in residence time may be due to the electrostatic interactions between the
nanoparticles with the negatively charged sialic acid residues present on the mucous along
the nasal linings [39].
Upon intranasal administration into male Wistar rats, plasma samples were collected
at deﬁned time points in order to evaluate the absorption and bioavailability of L-Dopa
loaded chitosan nanoparticles following intranasal administration relative to the control
group. The control group in this study received intranasal administration of unmodiﬁed
L-Dopa as a drug solution. In addition, IV injections were administered to a separate group
of rats to allow us to evaluate the absolute bioavailability for respective treatment groups.
The pharmacokinetic parameters evaluated were the area under the curve (AUC) from
time 0 to 240 min, maximum drug concentration in plasma (Cmax) and maximum time to
reach maximum drug concentration in plasma (Tmax). Table 3 shows AUC, Cmax and Tmax
values following intranasal administration of either 2.5 mg/kg of L-Dopa loaded chitosan
nanoparticles or 2.5 mg/kg of drug solution. From the table, AUC0–240 was determined
using the linear trapezoidal rule. The mean AUC value for L-Dopa drug solution was
6494.582 ± 688.38, while L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticle was 11,054.16 ± 1381.5. The
AUC value of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles was signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) higher (by
two-fold) than that of intranasal administration of L-Dopa drug solution alone. The data
showed that chitosan nanoparticles were capable of enhancing the absorption of L-Dopa
across the nasal epithelium enabling the drug to bypass ﬁrst-pass metabolism leading to
enhanced bioavailability.

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
15 of 19
Table 3. Pharmacokinetic proﬁles of 2.5 mg/kg L-dopa and 2.5 mg/kg L-dopa loaded chitosan
nanoparticles (formulation C2) after intranasal administration. Results are expressed as the mean ± S.E.
of 3 replicates; * p < 0.05.
Sample
Cmax
(µg/mL)
Tmax (min)
Area under the Curve
(AUC)
Absolute
Bioavailability, F (%)
L-dopa
50.018 ± 3.25
60
6494.582 ± 272.04
26.56 ± 1.11
L-dopa loaded chitosan NP
70.008 ± 5.77 *
90
11,054.160 ± 1153.50 *
45.20 ± 4.72 *
The Tmax for L-Dopa administered as a drug solution via the intranasal route was
60 min, indicating rapid absorption of the drug into the systemic circulation. This Tmax
was much faster than the reported Tmax for L-Dopa that was given via oral administration,
which is 90 min (Luinstra et al. (2019). After reaching the peak plasma concentration,
L-Dopa concentration declined drastically due to the half-life of the drug, which is between
45–90 min. In addition, any drug solution that is present along nasal mucosal after in-
tranasal administration will be eliminated rapidly eliminated due to mucociliary clearance
along the nasal cavity [62]. In contrast, there is a delay in time to reach the peak concentra-
tion, Tmax by 30 min for L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles, as shown in Table 3 and
Figure 5b. This may be attributed to the size of the nanoparticle, which is far larger than
the free drug molecule, thus necessitating a longer time for the nanoparticles to diffuse
across the nasal mucosa before being absorbed into systemic circulation, thus delaying the
time needed to reach Tmax.
Figure 5. (a) Schematic illustrating intranasal administration of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles
into male Wistar rat. (b) Pharmacokinetic proﬁle of 2.5 mg/kg L-Dopa drug solution and 2.5 mg/kg
L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles (Formulation C2) after intranasal administration. Results are
expressed as the mean ± SD, n = 4. Differences were calculated using one-way ANOVA, followed by
Tukey’s post hoc test, and deemed signiﬁcant at where p-value outputs were <0.001 (***).

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
16 of 19
Based on Figure 4b, the plasma concentration of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles
was signiﬁcantly higher (p < 0.05) compared to intranasal administration of L-Dopa drug
solution at time points 90, 120, 180 and 240 min. As shown in Table 3, the mean value
of absolute bioavailability (F%) for L-Dopa drug solution and L-Dopa loaded chitosan
nanoparticles was 26.56% and 45.20%, respectively. From the results, we can conclude that
L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles formulation has a higher bioavailability compared
to L-Dopa drug solution by two-fold. The mucoadhesive properties of chitosan also endow
the nanoparticles with a longer residence time along the nasal mucosa [63]. This innate
property of chitosan prolonged the period that L-Dopa can be absorbed along the nasal
mucosa leading to improved drug exposure as evidenced from the higher AUC, as shown in
Figure 4b. The mucoadhesive properties of the nanoparticles also enable sustained-release
of the drug, thus mitigating plasma L-Dopa level from dropping drastically, as evident in
Figure 4b and Figure S1 relative to intranasal administration of drug solution.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, the current work highlights the fabrication, characterisation and evalua-
tion of L-Dopa loaded polymeric nanoparticles for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
PLGA and chitosan were used as a polymer matrix for the development of these nanopar-
ticles. PLGA nanoparticles (formulations P1, P2 and P3) were prepared using solvent
evaporation technique, while chitosan nanoparticles (formulation C1, C2, C3 and C4) were
prepared by ionic gelation method with sodium TPP as a cross-linking agent to entrap the
payload. Characterisation studies were carried out to determine the particle size distribu-
tion, zeta potential, morphology and drug content of the polymeric nanoparticles. Based
on the ﬁndings, L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles (formulation C2) with a particle size
of 553 ± 52 nm and zeta potential of 46.2 ± 2.3 has the highest EE (82.38%). Additionally,
XRD analysis showed that L-Dopa was present in an amorphous state within the chitosan
nanoparticles. FTIR analysis demonstrated that there was no chemical alteration to the
drug upon loading into chitosan nanoparticle. Finally, an in vivo study was conducted
to evaluate the pharmacokinetic proﬁle of L-Dopa nanoparticles relative to drug solution
following intranasal administration. The pharmacokinetic proﬁle showed that the AUC
value for L-Dopa loaded nanoparticles (Formulation C2) was signiﬁcantly higher (p < 0.05)
by almost two-fold relative to the L-Dopa drug solution. However, L-Dopa loaded chitosan
nanoparticles showed a delayed Tmax of 90 min relative to the L-Dopa drug solution that
has a Tmax of 60 min. Nevertheless, the L-Dopa loaded chitosan exhibited a higher drug
release proﬁle due to the mucoadhesive properties of chitosan, thus mitigating the L-Dopa
plasma level from dropping drastically. Should this system be translated into clinical
practice, intranasal delivery of L-Dopa loaded chitosan nanoparticles may be a suitable
treatment alternative to oral administration for patients with Parkinson’s disease who
frequently suffer dysphagia.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ph15030370/s1, Figure S1: release proﬁle of L-Dopa from chitosan
nanoparticles (C2) when under physiological pH of nasal lining (pH 6.0) at 37 ◦C.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.Z.A., N.A.L. and K.A.H.; methodology, M.Z.A. and
K.A.H.; validation, M.Z.A.; formal analysis, M.Z.A., A.H.B.S.; investigation, M.Z.A.; resources,
K.A.H.; data curation, M.Z.A. and A.H.B.S.; writing—original draft preparation, M.Z.A. and K.A.H.;
writing—review and editing, A.H.B.S., Q.K.A., J.D.-R.; visualization, M.Z.A. and A.H.B.S.; super-
vision, N.A.L. and K.A.H.; project administration, K.A.H.; funding acquisition, K.A.H. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia (MOHE) under the
grant 600-RMI/FRGS 5/3 (115/2013) and The APC was funded by Universiti Teknologi MARA
Cawangan Selangor, Malaysia.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
17 of 19
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data is contained within the article and supplementary material.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by Universiti Teknologi MARA Cawangan Selangor
and the Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia (MOHE) under the grant 600-RMI/FRGS 5/3
(115/2013).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Pagliaro, L.A.; Pagliaro, A.M.; Pagliaro, L.A.; Pagliaro, A.M. Levodopa⋆[L-Dopa]. In PNDR: Psychologists’ Neuropsychotropic Drug
Reference; Routledge: Oxfordshire, UK, 2020; pp. 185–189.
2.
Lerner, R.P.; Francardo, V.; Fujita, K.; Bimpisidis, Z.; Jourdain, V.A.; Tang, C.C.; Dewey, S.L.; Chaly, T.; Cenci, M.A.; Eidelberg, D.
Levodopa-induced abnormal involuntary movements correlate with altered permeability of the blood-brain-barrier in the basal
ganglia. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Tambasco, N.; Romoli, M.; Calabresi, P. Levodopa in Parkinson’s Disease: Current Status and Future Developments. Curr.
Neuropharmacol. 2017, 16, 1239–1252. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Homayun, B.; Lin, X.; Choi, H.-J. Challenges and Recent Progress in Oral Drug Delivery Systems for Biopharmaceuticals.
Pharmaceutics 2019, 11, 129. [CrossRef]
5.
Suttrup, I.; Warnecke, T. Dysphagia in Parkinson’s Disease. Dysphagia 2016, 31, 24–32. [CrossRef]
6.
Erd˝o, F.; Bors, L.A.; Farkas, D.; Bajza, Á.; Gizurarson, S. Evaluation of Intranasal Delivery Route of Drug Administration for Brain
Targeting. Brain Res. Bull. 2018, 143, 155–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Davis, S.S.; Illum, L. Absorption Enhancers for Nasal Drug Delivery. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 2003, 42, 1107–1128. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
8.
Lee, Y.H.; Kim, K.H.; Yoon, I.K.; Lee, K.E.; Chun, I.K.; Rhie, J.Y.; Gwak, H.S. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of formulated levodopa
methyl ester nasal delivery systems. Eur. J. Drug Metab. Pharmacokinet. 2014, 39, 237–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Tang, S.; Wang, A.; Yan, X.; Chu, L.; Yang, X.; Song, Y.; Sun, K.; Yu, X.; Liu, R.; Wu, Z.; et al. Brain-targeted intranasal delivery of
dopamine with borneol and lactoferrin co-modiﬁed nanoparticles for treating Parkinson’s disease. Drug Deliv. 2019, 26, 700–707.
[CrossRef]
10.
Bustamante-Marin, X.M.; Ostrowski, L.E. Cilia and Mucociliary Clearance. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2017, 9, a028241.
[CrossRef]
11.
Zainuddin, S.Z.; Hamid, K.A. Chitosan-Based Oral Drug Delivery System for Peptide, Protein and Vaccine Delivery. In Chitin and
Chitosan—Physicochemical Properties and Industrial Applications [Working Title]; InTech: London, UK, 2021.
12.
Yu, S.; Xu, X.; Feng, J.; Liu, M.; Hu, K. Chitosan and chitosan coating nanoparticles for the treatment of brain disease. Int. J. Pharm.
2019, 560, 282–293. [CrossRef]
13.
Comoglu, T.; Arisoy, S.; Atalay, O.; Onal, D.; Pehlivanoglu, B. Development and in vivo application of levodopa loaded polylactic
co- gylicolic acid (PLGA) nanoparticles for nazal brain drug delivery. Park. Relat. Disord. 2020, 79, e87. [CrossRef]
14.
Arisoy, S.; Sayiner, O.; Comoglu, T.; Önal, D.; Atalay, O.; Pehlivanoglu, B. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of levodopa-loaded
nanoparticles for nose to brain delivery. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 2020, 25, 735–747. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Sharma, S.; Lohan, S.; Murthy, R.S.R. Formulation and characterization of intranasal mucoadhesive nanoparticulates and
thermo-reversible gel of levodopa for brain delivery. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2013, 40, 869–878. [CrossRef]
16.
Budhian, A.; Siegel, S.J.; Winey, K.I. Haloperidol-loaded PLGA nanoparticles: Systematic study of particle size and drug content.
Int. J. Pharm. 2007, 336, 367–375. [CrossRef]
17.
Rathi Mahesh, C.; Girish Sailor, A.K.; Seth, S.P.C. Development and characterization of quetiapine loaded chitosan nanoparticle.
Pharma Sci. Monit. 2013, 4, 150–169.
18.
Mohd, Z.A.; Khuriah, A.H. A Validated High-Performance Liquid Chromatographic Method for The Determination of Levodopa
in Rat Plasma & Its Application in Pharmacokinetic Studies. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Symposium on Business, Engineering
and Industrial Applications, Bandung, Indonesia, 23–26 September 2012; pp. 136–141.
19.
Mohan, L.J.; McDonald, L.; Daly, J.S.; Ramtoola, Z. Optimising PLGA-PEG Nanoparticle Size and Distribution for Enhanced
Drug Targeting to the Inﬂamed Intestinal Barrier. Pharmaceutics 2020, 12, 1114. [CrossRef]
20.
Huang, W.; Zhang, C. Tuning the Size of Poly(lactic-co-glycolic Acid) (PLGA) Nanoparticles Fabricated by Nanoprecipitation.
Biotechnol. J. 2018, 13, 13. [CrossRef]
21.
Sawtarie, N.; Cai, Y.; Lapitsky, Y. Preparation of chitosan/tripolyphosphate nanoparticles with highly tunable size and low
polydispersity. Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 2017, 157, 110–117. [CrossRef]
22.
Rampino, A.; Borgogna, M.; Blasi, P.; Bellich, B.; Cesàro, A. Chitosan nanoparticles: Preparation, size evolution and stability. Int. J.
Pharm. 2013, 455, 219–228. [CrossRef]
23.
Cai, Y.; Lapitsky, Y. Analysis of chitosan/tripolyphosphate micro- and nanogel yields is key to understanding their protein uptake
performance. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2017, 494, 242–254. [CrossRef]

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
18 of 19
24.
Lazaridou, M.; Christodoulou, E.; Nerantzaki, M.; Kostoglou, M.; Lambropoulou, D.A.; Katsarou, A.; Pantopoulos, K.; Bikiaris,
D.N. Formulation and In-Vitro Characterization of Chitosan-Nanoparticles Loaded with the Iron Chelator Deferoxamine Mesylate
(DFO). Pharmaceutics 2020, 12, 238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Piani, L.; Papo, A. Sodium Tripolyphosphate and Polyphosphate as Dispersing Agents for Alumina Suspensions: Rheological
Characterization. J. Eng. 2013, 2013, 1–4. [CrossRef]
26.
Al-Nemrawi, N.K.; Alsharif, S.S.M.; Dave, R.H. Preparation of chitosan-tpp nanoparticles: The inﬂuence of chitosan polymeric
properties and formulation variables. Int. J. Appl. Pharm. 2018, 10, 60–65. [CrossRef]
27.
Dong, Y.; Ng, W.K.; Shen, S.; Kim, S.; Tan, R.B. Scalable ionic gelation synthesis of chitosan nanoparticles for drug delivery in
static mixers. Carbohydr. Polym. 2013, 94, 940–945. [CrossRef]
28.
Qun, G.; Ajun, W. Effects of molecular weight, degree of acetylation and ionic strength on surface tension of chitosan in dilute
solution. Carbohydr. Polym. 2006, 64, 29–36. [CrossRef]
29.
Berger, J.; Reist, M.; Mayer, J.; Felt, O.; Peppas, N.; Gurny, R. Structure and interactions in covalently and ionically crosslinked
chitosan hydrogels for biomedical applications. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2004, 57, 19–34. [CrossRef]
30.
Fan, W.; Yan, W.; Xu, Z.; Ni, H. Formation mechanism of monodisperse, low molecular weight chitosan nanoparticles by ionic
gelation technique. Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 2012, 90, 21–27. [CrossRef]
31.
Lowry, G.V.; Hill, R.J.; Harper, S.; Rawle, A.F.; Hendren, C.O.; Klaessig, F.; Nobbmann, U.; Sayre, P.; Rumble, J. Guidance to
improve the scientiﬁc value of zeta-potential measurements in nanoEHS. Environ. Sci. Nano 2016, 3, 953–965. [CrossRef]
32.
Al Meslmani, B.M.; Mahmoud, G.F.; Bakowsky, U. Development of expanded polytetraﬂuoroethylene cardiovascular graft
platform based on immobilization of poly lactic- co -glycolic acid nanoparticles using a wet chemical modiﬁcation technique. Int.
J. Pharm. 2017, 529, 238–244. [CrossRef]
33.
Nicolete, R.; dos Santos, D.F.; Faccioli, L.H. The uptake of PLGA micro or nanoparticles by macrophages provokes distinct in vitro
inﬂammatory response. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2011, 11, 1557–1563. [CrossRef]
34.
Chiu, H.I.; Samad, N.A.; Fang, L.; Lim, V. Cytotoxicity of targeted PLGA nanoparticles: A systematic review. RSC Adv. 2021, 11,
9433–9449. [CrossRef]
35.
Parveen, S.; Sahoo, S.K. Long circulating chitosan/PEG blended PLGA nanoparticle for tumor drug delivery. Eur. J. Pharmacol.
2011, 670, 372–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Joseph, E.; Singhvi, G. Multifunctional Nanocrystals for Cancer Therapy: A Potential Nanocarrier; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands, 2019; ISBN 9780128165058.
37.
Patel, N.; Zariwala, M.G.; Al-Obaidi, H. Fabrication of Biopolymer Based Nanoparticles for the Entrapment of Chromium and
Iron Supplements. Processes 2020, 8, 707. [CrossRef]
38.
Karimi, M.; Avci, P.; Ahi, M.; Gazori, T.; Hamblin, M.R.; Naderi-Manesh, H. Evaluation of Chitosan-Tripolyphosphate Nanoparti-
cles as a p-ShRNA Delivery Vector: Formulation, Optimization and Cellular Uptake Study. J. Nanopharm. Drug Deliv. 2014, 1,
266–278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Migliore, M.M.; Vyas, T.K.; Campbell, R.B.; Amiji, M.M.; Waszczak, B.L. Brain delivery of proteins by the intranasal route of
administration: A comparison of cationic liposomes versus aqueous solution formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2010, 99, 1745–1761.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Ing, L.Y.; Zin, N.M.; Sarwar, A.; Katas, H. Antifungal Activity of Chitosan Nanoparticles and Correlation with Their Physical
Properties. Int. J. Biomater. 2012, 2012, 632698. [CrossRef]
41.
Pawar, V.K.; Asthana, S.; Mishra, N.; Chaurasia, M.; Chourasia, M.K. Chitosan coated hydroxypropyl methylcellulose-
ethylcellulose shell based gastroretentive dual working system to improve the bioavailability of norﬂoxacin. RSC Adv. 2013, 3,
19144–19153. [CrossRef]
42.
Zaki, S.S.O.; Ibrahim, M.N.; Katas, H. Particle Size Affects Concentration-Dependent Cytotoxicity of Chitosan Nanoparticles
towards Mouse Hematopoietic Stem Cells. J. Nanotechnol. 2015, 2015, 1–5. [CrossRef]
43.
Huang, G.-Q.; Xiao, J.-X.; Jia, L.; Yang, J. Complex Coacervation of O-Carboxymethylated Chitosan and Gum Arabic. Int. J. Polym.
Mater. Polym. Biomater. 2014, 64, 198–204. [CrossRef]
44.
Swain, S.K.; Dey, R.K.; Islam, M.; Patel, R.; Jha, U.; Patnaik, T.; Airoldi, C. Removal of Fluoride from Aqueous Solution Using
Aluminum-Impregnated Chitosan Biopolymer. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2009, 44, 2096–2116. [CrossRef]
45.
Iqbal, M.; Zafar, N.; Fessi, H.; Elaissari, A. Double emulsion solvent evaporation techniques used for drug encapsulation. Int. J.
Pharm. 2015, 496, 173–190. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Fu, X.; Ping, Q.; Gao, Y. Effects of formulation factors on encapsulation efﬁciency and release behaviourin vitroof huperzine
A-PLGA microspheres. J. Microencapsul. 2005, 22, 705–714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Ray, S.; Mishra, A.; Mandal, T.K.; Sa, B.; Chakraborty, J. Optimization of the process parameters for the fabrication of a polymer
coated layered double hydroxide-methotrexate nanohybrid for the possible treatment of osteosarcoma. RSC Adv. 2015, 5,
102574–102592. [CrossRef]
48.
Alshamsan, A. Nanoprecipitation Is More Efﬁcient than Emulsion Solvent Evaporation Method to Encapsulate Cucurbitacin I in
PLGA Nanoparticles, Elsevier Enhanced Reader. Saudi Pharm. J. 2014, 22, 219–222. [CrossRef]
49.
Al-Maaieh, A.; Flanagan, D.R. Salt and cosolvent effects on ionic drug loading into microspheres using an O/W method. J. Control.
Release 2001, 70, 169–181. [CrossRef]

Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 370
19 of 19
50.
Zhu, H.L.J.K.J. Preparation and characterization of hCG-loaded polylactide or poly(lactide-co-glycolide) microspheres using a
modiﬁed water-in-oil-in-water (w/o/w) emulsion solvent evaporation technique. J. Microencapsul. 2001, 18, 247–260. [CrossRef]
51.
Pedroso-Santana, S.; Fleitas-Salazar, N. Ionotropic gelation method in the synthesis of nanoparticles/microparticles for biomedical
purposes. Polym. Int. 2020, 69, 443–447. [CrossRef]
52.
Xu, Y.; Du, Y. Effect of Molecular Structure of Chitosan on Protein Deli v Ery Properties of Chitosan Nanoparticles. Int. J. Pharm.
2003, 250, 215–226. [CrossRef]
53.
Huang, Y.; Lapitsky, Y. On the kinetics of chitosan/tripolyphosphate micro- and nanogel aggregation and their effects on particle
polydispersity. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2017, 486, 27–37. [CrossRef]
54.
Saini, R.; Srivastava, A.; Gupta, P.; Das, K. pH dependent reversible aggregation of Chitosan and glycol-Chitosan stabilized silver
nanoparticles. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2011, 511, 326–330. [CrossRef]
55.
Biró, E.; Németh, Á.S.; Sisak, C.; Feczkó, T.; Gyenis, J. Preparation of chitosan particles suitable for enzyme immobilization.
J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 2008, 70, 1240–1246. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Luinstra, M.; Grasmeijer, F.; Hagedoorn, P.; Moes, J.R.; Frijlink, H.W.; de Boer, A.H. A levodopa dry powder inhaler for the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease patients in off periods. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2015, 97, 22–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Ledeti, I.; Bolintineanu, S.; Vlase, G.; Circioban, D.; Ledeti, A.; Vlase, T.; Suta, L.-M.; Caunii, A.; Murariu, M. Compatibility study
between antiparkinsonian drug Levodopa and excipients by FTIR spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis. J. Therm.
Anal. 2017, 130, 433–441. [CrossRef]
58.
Qi, L.; Xu, Z.; Jiang, X.; Hu, C.; Zou, X. Preparation and antibacterial activity of chitosan nanoparticles. Carbohydr. Res. 2004, 339,
2693–2700. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Kestur, U.S.; Taylor, L.S. Role of polymer chemistry in inﬂuencing crystal growth rates from amorphous felodipine. CrystEngComm
2010, 12, 2390–2397. [CrossRef]
60.
Lim, S.-H.; Hudson, S.M. Synthesis and antimicrobial activity of a water-soluble chitosan derivative with a ﬁber-reactive group.
Carbohydr. Res. 2004, 339, 313–319. [CrossRef]
61.
Fernandes Queiroz, M.; Melo, K.R.T.; Sabry, D.A.; Sassaki, G.L.; Rocha, H.A.O. Does the Use of Chitosan Contribute to Oxalate
Kidney Stone Formation? Mar. Drugs 2015, 13, 141–158. [CrossRef]
62.
Agu, R.U. Challenges in nasal drug absorption: How far have we come? Ther. Deliv. 2016, 7, 495–510. [CrossRef]
63.
Cortés, H.; Alcalá-Alcalá, S.; Caballero-Florán, I.H.; Bernal-Chávez, S.A.; Ávalos-Fuentes, A.; González-Torres, M.; Carmen,
M.G.-D.; Figueroa-González, G.; Reyes-Hernández, O.D.; Floran, B.; et al. A Reevaluation of Chitosan-Decorated Nanoparticles
to Cross the Blood-Brain Barrier. Membranes 2020, 10, 212. [CrossRef]