1082
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOTECHNOLOGY, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2013
Salt-Leaching Synthesis of Porous
PLGA Nanoparticles
Azhar Ilyas, Muhymin Islam, Waseem Asghar, Jyothi U. Menon, Aniket S. Wadajkar, Kytai T. Nguyen,
and Samir M. Iqbal, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles
are widely used for controlled delivery of bioactive agents in thera-
peutic applications. These nanoparticles show bioavailability, bet-
ter encapsulation, controlled release, biocompatibility, and in vivo
biodegradability. This paper reports a novel approach to synthe-
size porous PLGA nanoparticles and their use as controlled release
vehicles. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) loaded PLGA nanoparti-
cles (porous and nonporous) were synthesized using water-in-oil-
in-water double emulsion method. Speciﬁcally, PLGA nanoparti-
cles were prepared using chloroform and polyvinyl alcohol, and
freeze drying was employed for the phase separation to obtain the
nanoparticles. The porous nanoparticles were prepared through
the salt-leaching process where sodium bicarbonate was used as an
extractable porogen. In vitro drug release behavior of porous and
nonporous nanoparticles was monitored over a period of 30 days.
A much more enhanced BSA release was observed in case of porous
polymeric nanoparticles when compared to nonporous nanoparti-
cles. The characterization was done using laser scattering, zeta po-
tential analysis, and scanning electron microscopy. The drug load-
ing efﬁciencies for BSA in porous and nonporous PLGA nanopar-
ticles were 65.50% and 77.59%, respectively. Over a period of
30 days, the cumulative BSA released from PLGA porous and non-
porous nanoparticles were measured to be 87.41% and 59.91%,
respectively. The synthesis of porous nanoparticles with this novel,
Manuscript received January 31, 2013; revised April 29, 2013; accepted
April 29, 2013. Date of publication August 23, 2013; date of current version
November 6, 2013. This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under CAREER Grant ECCS-0845669 to SMI. The work of A. Ilyas, M.
Islam, and W. Asghar was supported in part by the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, and the Consortium for Nano-
materials for Aerospace Commerce and Technology program, Rice University,
Houston, TX, USA. The review of this paper was arranged by Associate Editor
M. De Vittorio.
A. Ilyas and M. Islam are with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Nano-Bio Lab, and Nanotechnology Research Center, Shimadzu Institute for
Research Technologies, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019
USA (e-mail: azhar.ilyas@mavs.uta.edu; muhymin.islam@mavs.uta.edu).
W. Asghar was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Univer-
sity of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019 USA. He is now with the
Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA, and also with the
Center for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail:
waseem.asghar@mit.edu).
J. U. Menon and A. S. Wadajkar are with the Department of Bioengineer-
ing, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019 USA (e-mail:
jyothi.menon@mavs.uta.edu; aniket.wadajkar@mavs.uta.edu).
K. T. Nguyen is with the Department of Bioengineering, University of
Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76010 USA, and also with the Univer-
sity of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 USA (e-mail:
knguyen@uta.edu).
S. M. Iqbal is with the Department of Electrical Engineering Nano-Bio Lab,
Department of Bioengineering, and the Nanotechnology Research Center, Shi-
madzu Institute for Research Technologies, University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX 76019 USA (e-mail: SMIQBAL@uta.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNANO.2013.2279532
rapid, and inexpensive method opens a new horizon of using a wide
range of cheap and easily-accessible water-soluble salts that can be
extracted through leaching process to introduce porous morphol-
ogy on the nanoparticle surfaces. The porous nanoparticles can
have useful applications in controlled drug delivery systems.
Index Terms—Drug delivery, drug loading efﬁciency, nanopar-
ticles, nanoporous particles, porogen, salt-leaching.
I. INTRODUCTION
O
VER the last few decades, there has been increased inter-
est in developing biodegradable micro/nanoparticles for
drug delivery applications. Among the new drug delivery sys-
tems, the polymeric nanoparticles have emerged as promising
carriers for sustained release of bioactive agents. The increased
surface area offered by small particles makes these exceed-
ingly effective for targeted drug delivery [1]–[3]. It has also
been reported that nanoparticles can offer elevated drug content
inside the neoplastic cells by prevailing over the multidrug resis-
tance [4], [5]. The increased focus on deploying nanoparticles
as drug delivery systems is due to the ease of their preparation
with well-deﬁned biodegradable polymers like poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) (PLGA), which are low cost and show highly
stable behavior in the biological ﬂuids [6], [7]. The destiny of
nanoparticles in any drug delivery operation is also an important
concern during the development process.
The controlled and targeted release eliminates the possibility
of both under and overdosing. The control of the concentration
of released drug in the therapeutic range signiﬁcantly improves
the effects and quality of the drug. The PLGA offers many
possibilities to accurately control the drug release kinetics over
periods of days to months and easy administration using stan-
dard intramuscular or intravenous routes. But drug stability and
accelerated polymer degradation due to autocatalytic effects are
the major concerns in nonporous PLGA-based particles [8].
The porous drug delivery systems can overcome these autocat-
alytic effects by increasing the diffusivity of the molecules [9].
Thus, PLGA-based porous nanoparticles can be very helpful to
optimize the therapeutic efﬁciency of medical treatments and
to reduce serious side effects [10]. The porous nanoparticle
systems also exhibit much better ﬂow and aerosolization ef-
ﬁciency during pulmonary administration when compared to
nonporous nanoparticles [11], [12]. The porous and nonporous
PLGA nanoparticles are widely studied for their drug release
behaviors. The pore characteristics have signiﬁcant impact on
drug release and by controlling pore morphology, it is possible
to design highly controlled drug release systems [10]. In this pa-
per, we describe the salt-leaching technique to prepare porous
1536-125X © 2013 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

ILYAS et al.: SALT-LEACHING SYNTHESIS OF POROUS PLGA NANOPARTICLES
1083
polymeric drug delivery system with prolonged and con-
trolled drug release properties. PLGA is a biocompatible and
biodegradable copolymer which undergoes hydrolysis in the
body to produce the biodegradable metabolites; glycolic acid
and lactic acid. The biodegradability, biocompatibility, and tis-
sue reaction of PLGA have been documented before [5], [13],
[14]. Given all these exquisite properties, it has been approved
by Food and Drug Administration in USA and European Medi-
cal Agency for use in parenteral drug delivery systems. Numer-
ous polymeric objects like microspheres, microcapsules, and
nanoparticles have been synthesized using PLGA to deliver va-
riety of drugs [15]. These PLGA nanoparticles are prepared
either by using single emulsion or double emulsion methods.
The single emulsion method is straightforward where only one
water phase solution is emulsiﬁed with an oil phase solution. The
water-in-oil-in-water (w/o/w) double emulsion method incorpo-
rates dispersed oil beads containing smaller aqueous globules.
The nanoparticles obtained by this technique provide a great op-
portunity for the controlled release of chemical species initially
entrapped in the internal globules [16], [17].
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) is a hydrophilic drug model
which ﬁnds its use in a wide range of applications due to its
stability, low-cost, and minimal side effects in most of the
biochemical reactions. Similarly, chloroform (CHCl3) is also
widely used organic solvent because it is fairly unreactive, con-
veniently volatile, and effortlessly miscible with other organic
solutions.
Nanoparticles have been identiﬁed as important drug carrier
nanovehicles where therapeutic and diagnostic agents are en-
capsulated, covalently attached, or adsorbed on to the surface
of such nanocarriers. The research into rational and controlled
drug delivery has resulted into hollow nanospheres and porous
nanoparticles. The porous nanoparticle systems can be made
of various materials, prepared in a variety of different ways,
and designed to deliver drugs to speciﬁc parts of the body. The
porous nanoparticles can vary from 25 nm to several hundred nm
of diameter [11]. Owing to large effective surface areas, porous
nanoparticles are widely used as inorganic carriers for biolog-
ical reagents [18]. The porous nature has proven to facilitate a
controlled release of encapsulated drugs of varying chemistry
and molecular weights.
Various approaches have been developed before to synthe-
size porous micro/nanoparticles which incorporate the use of
poly(acrylic acid), Pluronic F-127, or ammonium bicarbonate
as the porogen reagent [19]–[21]. These chemical species are
either limited by their physicochemical properties, high price,
or need for thermal curing. We offer a simple and straightfor-
ward method, which may empower us to use a wide range of
cheap, easily obtainable, and water-soluble salts as extractable
porogens. Such a rapid, inexpensive, and simple technique with
potential for a variety of alternative materials as porogen, can
improve the controlled drug delivery systems to a large extent.
In this work, porous and nonporous PLGA nanoparticles
containing BSA were prepared by the w/o/w double emulsion
method using sodium bicarbonate as the extractable porogen.
The porous nanoparticles showed increased and sustained drug
release than the nonporous ones. The nanoparticle size, size
distribution, porosity, stability, drug loading efﬁciency, and drug
release behavior were characterized. The BSA release behavior
was characterized using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein as-
say. Standard curves were plotted to determine the amount of
the drug loaded and released.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Chemicals
All the chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise noted. There were three
major experimental goals achieved in succession. The ﬁrst sec-
tion details the synthesis of drug loaded porous and nonporous
nanoparticles. The second step focuses on drug loading efﬁ-
ciency. The third and the most important part demonstrates the
drug release behavior of the nanoparticles.
B. Synthesis of BSA Loaded Porous and
Nonporous PLGA Nanoparticles
Twenty milligrams of the hydrophilic BSA was dissolved in
0.2 ml of deionized (DI) water to make the water phase of the
solution (w1). In parallel, 90 mg of PLGA was dissolved in
3 ml of chloroform to make 3% PLGA solution, forming the
oil phase solution (o). Then, 1 gm of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)
was dissolved in 20 ml of warm (50 ◦C) DI water to make
5% aqueous PVA solution that formed the second water phase
solution (w2). All the solutions were vortexed to ensure that
the reagents were mixed well. Now, the BSA solution (w1) was
added to the PLGA solution and vortexed for 30 s to make
water-in-oil phase. In order to prepare porous nanoparticles,
2 mg of sodium bicarbonate was mixed in 1 ml of DI water to
form 2% (w/v) porogen solution. This solution was immediately
added to the above water-in-oil solution to introduce pores on
the particles. These pores would be formed at a later stage due to
salt-leaching. This step of adding sodium bicarbonate solution
was skipped for the preparation of nonporous nanoparticles as
shown by the schematic ﬂowchart in Fig. 1. The solution was
then sonicated for 1–2 min at 40 W, and then added drop-wise
to the stirring beaker of aqueous PVA solution. This formed
the w/o/w phase. The resultant solution was then emulsiﬁed by
sonication for 2 min at 40 W. Next, the mixture was gently
stirred overnight in a chemical hood allowing the chloroform
to evaporate. Once the chloroform evaporated completely, the
solution was transferred into a 50 ml tube and centrifuged at
4000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and frozen
for calculating the loading efﬁciency at later stage. The pellet
was resuspended in 5 ml PBS and vortexed for 1 min. The
dynamic light scattering (DLS) was used to measure the size and
polydispersity of nanoparticles using a ZetaPALS DLS detector
(Brookhaven Instruments, Holtsville, NY, USA). The solutions
were then freeze dried to –80 ◦C.
In order to get the porous nanoparticles, the freeze-dried
nanoparticles were taken in a plastic tube and 3 ml of DI wa-
ter was added to perform salt leaching. The tube was vortexed
again and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 15 min. This step was
repeated three times to completely remove the trapped salts.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

1084
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOTECHNOLOGY, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2013
Fig. 1.
Schematic ﬂowchart demonstrates the procedure to synthesize porous
and nonporous nanoparticles.
Iterative washing in DI water after centrifugation is known to
completely remove the water-soluble salts [22], [23]. The su-
pernatant during salt-leaching was also collected and frozen to
study the possible drug released during leaching as the loaded
drug (BSA) was hydrophilic.
C. Preparation of PLGA Nanoparticles for Scanning Electron
Microscope Imaging
The freeze-dried nanoparticles were suspended in DI water
and diluted 10X to reduce their density on the substrate surface
used for imaging. DI water was used instead of PBS to avoid
crystallization and imaging artifacts stemming from the salts of
PBS. The solution was then poured on the top of autoclaved
glass cover slips and left overnight to dry in nitrogen ambient.
Fig. 2.
SEM micrographs of BSA-loaded PLGA nanoparticles. (a) Nonporous
nanoparticles with average diameter of 321.8 nm. The inset shows a magniﬁed
view of a nonporous nanoparticle. (b) Porous nanoparticles with average diam-
eter of 525.2 nm. The inset shows a magniﬁed view of a porous nanoparticle to
illustrate the surface topography and estimated pore sizes of 30–60 nm.
The samples were then sputter coated with 50 ˚A thick gold
to prevent the surface from getting charged during electron mi-
croscopy. The thin layer of gold coating made sure that the cover
slip surfaces were conductive enough to image with scanning
electron microscope (SEM). Fig. 2 shows the SEM micrographs
of porous and nonporous nanoparticles.
D. Indirect Calculation of Drug Loading Efﬁciency
The drug loading efﬁciency was determined using an indi-
rect method. The supernatant samples collected and frozen in
the previous steps were used to calculate the loading efﬁciency.
The indirect method relied on the protein present in the super-
natant solution. Instead of direct investigation of the amount of
drug loaded in the nanoparticles, the amount of drug present in
the supernatant was measured using the standard curves. The
drug present in supernatant solution reﬂected the amount of un-
loaded drug which was subsequently used to calculate the loaded
drug. Loading Efﬁciency was calculated using the formula given
below
Loading Efﬁciency (%) = A −B
A
× 100
(1)
Where A represents the amount of original drug dissolved in DI
water and B is the amount of drug present in the supernatant
(unloaded drug).
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

ILYAS et al.: SALT-LEACHING SYNTHESIS OF POROUS PLGA NANOPARTICLES
1085
E. BSA Release from Nanoparticles
In order to monitor drug release from BSA loaded nanopar-
ticles, these were resuspended in PBS and placed in a 100 kDa
molecular weight cutoff dialysis bag (Spectrum Laboratories
Inc., Rancho Dominguez, CA, USA). Equal concentrations of
porous and nonporous nanoparticles (2 mg each) were separately
mixed in 2 ml of PBS and were put in different bags. Each dial-
ysis bag was immersed in 10 ml of PBS solution which was
the dialysate. Three replicates for both types of particles were
prepared to study the drug release behavior. Drug release studies
were performed by measuring BSA release at predeﬁned time
points: 1, 5, 7, 11, 14, 18, 22, and 30 days. At each time point,
the PBS solution was replaced by fresh PBS solution keeping
the volume unchanged and the collected samples were stored at
−20 ◦C for further analysis.
At each time point, three samples (one from each replicate)
were collected to get reliable release data. After collecting all the
samples for porous and nonporous PLGA nanoparticles, Pierce
BCA protein assay (Fisher Scientiﬁc, Hampton, NH, USA) was
used for quantitative analysis of the drug release. The working
reagent consisted of reagent A and reagent B at the ratio of
50:1, where BCA was used as reagent A and copper sulphate as
reagent B. A 200 μl volume of the working reagent and 25 μl of
PBS (containing BSA obtained from collected samples) were
added to each well for respective measurements of porous and
nonporous nanoparticles’ drug release behavior. After adding all
the samples, which were collected at predetermined time points,
to the BCA containing wells, standard solutions were also added
on the same well plate, with gradually reducing concentrations
of BSA to determine the standard curve. The well plate was then
covered with the aluminum foil and kept in the incubator at 37 ◦C
for 30 min. In the presence of protein, the color of the solution
changed from blue to purple. Absorbance was recorded using
spectrophotometry (Tecan Inﬁnite M200 Plate Reader, Durham,
NC, USA) at wavelength of 562 nm. Absorbance values for the
standard concentration values provided a standard curve that
was then used to calculate the concentration of BSA released.
The percentages of protein release were calculated using the
following equation:
Percentage of protein release = X
Y × 100
(2)
where X indicates the amount of released BSA and Y represents
the total amount of loaded BSA.
With the obtained values, percentage of cumulative protein
release was calculated and plotted against the administered time
points. The standard deviations of the absorbance at each time
point were also plotted on the same graph to demonstrate the
precision of the data.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The morphology of synthesized nanoparticles was found to
be spherical from SEM micrographs with average diameters for
porous and nonporous nanoparticles to be 525.2 and 321.8 nm,
TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF BSA-LOADED POROUS AND
NONPOROUS PLGA NANOPARTICLES
Fig. 3.
Size distribution of BSA-loaded (a) nonporous and (b) porous PLGA
nanoparticles.
respectively (see Table I). The size distribution was also ob-
served to be more uniform in case of nonporous nanoparticles
as shown in Fig. 3.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

1086
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOTECHNOLOGY, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2013
The porous nanoparticles were expected to be larger than the
nonporous nanoparticles in line with previous reports [11]. The
larger sizes of the porous nanoparticles were due to sodium bi-
carbonate incorporation which later leached out, leaving porous
features on the nanoparticle surfaces. The porosity, pore sizes,
and distribution of pores on the porous nanoparticles could be
controlled by using different concentrations of the porogen [21].
Here, a single concentration of porogen was used because the
main focus was to establish salt-leaching as a novel technique
to prepare the porous nanoparticles. The pore sizes were seen to
range between 30–60 nm from SEM data.
Polydispersity index, a dimensionless number, is used to
gauge the particle size distribution. Its value may vary from
0.01 (monodispersed particles) to 0.7 (particles with ﬂuctuating
size distribution) [5]. Particles with broadly varying size distri-
bution indicate polydispersity index >0.7 [24]. Polydispersity of
both types of nanoparticles (given in Table I) clearly shows that
both types of nanoparticles had polydispersity index much less
than 0.7. Porous PLGA nanoparticles exhibited polydispersity
higher than nonporous ones which might have stemmed from
the uncontrolled vortexing of porogen in w/o phase solution
while synthesizing the nanoparticles.
The stability of the nanoparticles in solution is very impor-
tant for biological applications that incorporate colloidal sus-
pensions. The particle composition and the medium in which
these nanoparticles are dispersed determine the zeta potential
(ζ) of the particles. High surface charges (ζ > ±30 mV) pre-
vent aggregation and thus make the nanoparticles highly stable
in the colloid suspension [25]. Particles with surface charges
(ζ > ±10 mV) are also relatively stable whereas ζ < ±10 mV al-
lows the particles to ﬂocculate due to small repulsive effect [26].
In this work, we used PLGA with carboxylic acid end groups
(–COOH) on it and the presence of carboxyl groups on the
PLGA nanoparticle surfaces passed on negative charges which
was conﬁrmed by the ζ values recorded for both types of
nanoparticles. Though the zeta potential for the nanoparticles
was less than –30 mV, but it was still high enough to give rea-
sonably good colloidal properties.
The drug loading efﬁciency was determined by using the
indirect method because BSA is hydrophilic drug and can de-
grade in organic solvent. The loading efﬁciency was found to
be 65.50% and 77.59% for BSA loaded porous and nonporous
nanoparticles, respectively. The drug loading efﬁciency was suf-
ﬁciently high which showed the viability of those nanoparticles
in controlled drug delivery systems. High loading efﬁciency is
always desired for an efﬁcient drug delivery system so that less
quantity of the nanoparticles would be needed to administer a
particular dose. The nonporous nanoparticles had higher load-
ing efﬁciency as compared to porous nanoparticles. The porous
structures on the surface of nanospheres allowed some drug to
easily ﬂow out whereas nonporous nanoparticles incorporated
more drug [21]. The salt-leaching process, on one hand, caused
the formation of porous structures on the nanoparticles surface
but it also reduced the loading efﬁciency of the nanoparticles.
To investigate the BSA drug release from porous and non-
porous PLGA nanoparticles, BCA protein assay was used.
The cumulative BSA release for porous and nonporous PLGA
Fig. 4.
Comparison of BSA release from porous and nonporous PLGA
nanoparticles shows a sustained release behavior. The porous nanoparticles
show higher release dose over the course of a month than nonporous ones. Error
bars represent the standard deviation in percentage protein release (n = 3).
nanoparticles was found to be 87.41% and 59.91%, respectively,
over a period of 30 days. For the ﬁrst few days, more than 30%
of BSA was released, while after that relatively less amount
of BSA release was observed as shown in Fig. 4. The release
behavior of both types of nanoparticles is plotted to show the
comparison over the same period of time.
Comparison of BSA release from the porous and nonporous
PLGA nanoparticles showed a faster but sustained release from
porous nanoparticles. The porous nanoparticles offered better
release behavior owing to their increased surface area and bet-
ter ﬂow of ﬂuid through leaky structures [27], [28]. Gener-
ally, reports show that larger particles show lower drug release
rate when compared to smaller particles because the length
of diffusion pathway is higher for larger particles and drug
concentration gradient is smaller [10]. Here, porous nanoparti-
cles were larger in size but exhibited higher release rate than
smaller nonporous nanoparticles. This nonintuitive behavior
clearly stemmed from the porosity. As the porosity increased,
the percent of cumulative drug release also increased [21]. More-
over drug release from porous nanoparticles would also depend
on the pore characteristics and the nature of host guest inter-
actions [29]. These data show nanoparticles that are not only
larger but also have higher release of drug.
The drug release data for 30 days showed a sustained release
which was reﬂected by a good amount of BSA. A burst release
for the ﬁrst few days was observed which stemmed from the
release of drug adsorbed on or near the surface of nanoparticles
and thus ensured immediate availability of the therapeutic drug.
The PLGA nanoparticles are employed for oral and intravenous
drug delivery routes but these are not selective to speciﬁc cells.
Selectivity can be imparted by making the nanoparticles func-
tional. A number of functional groups, antibodies, and aptamers
can be employed to make these selective to certain cells, pro-
teins, or genes. These functional groups can bind to the target
cells and the payload of nanoparticle-based drugs can be deliv-
ered selectively [30], [31].
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

ILYAS et al.: SALT-LEACHING SYNTHESIS OF POROUS PLGA NANOPARTICLES
1087
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper demonstrates that BSA-loaded porous PLGA
nanoparticles provide sustained and enhanced drug release, even
though these are larger in size. The salt-leaching is a novel
approach to synthesize porous nanoparticles where sodium bi-
carbonate is used as the porogen. Moreover, the nonporous
nanoparticles are very uniform in their size distribution but the
porous nanoparticles show a larger distribution over a speciﬁc
range, due to the trapped salts that lead to the pore formation af-
ter leaching. Drug loading efﬁciency of nonporous nanoparticles
is calculated to be higher than that of porous nanoparticles which
is due to easy release through the features on the porous nanopar-
ticles. The drug release behavior of both types of nanoparticles
is monitored over a period of 30 days and porous nanoparticles,
although larger in size, show faster sustained release. Owing to
the enhanced surface area, better release behavior and their sta-
bility over varying temperatures, porous nanoparticles are thus
recognized as much better drug carriers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Evi Shiakolas for her as-
sistance with graphics and W. Ali for help in data analysis.
They acknowledge valuable discussions with the scientiﬁc staff
at the UT-Arlington Characterization Center for Materials and
Biology (C2MB) and Nanotechnology Research Center. Partial
nanoparticle characterization was carried out at Nanomedicine
and Drug Delivery Laboratory, University of Texas Southwest-
ern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Parajo, I. d’ Angelo, A. Horvath, T. Vantus, K. Gyorgy, A. Welle,
M. Garcia-Fuentes, and M. J. Alonso, “PLGA: Poloxamer blend micro-
and nanoparticles as controlled release systems for synthetic proangio-
genic factors,” Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., vol. 41, pp. 644–649, 2010.
[2] S. Gelperina, O. Maksimenko, A. Khalansky, L. Vanchugova, E. Shipulo,
K. Abbasova, R. Berdiev, S. Wohlfart, N. Chepurnova, and J. Kreuter,
“Drug delivery to the brain using surfactant-coated poly (lactide-co-
glycolide) nanoparticles: Inﬂuence of the formulation parameters,” Eur.
J. Pharm. Biopharm., vol. 74, pp. 157–163, 2009.
[3] B. J. Boyd, “Past and future evolution in colloidal drug delivery systems,”
Expert Opin. Drug Del., vol. 5, pp. 69–85, 2008.
[4] S. Bennis, C. Chapey, J. Robert, and P. Couvreur, “Enhanced cytotoxicity
of doxorubicin encapsulated in polyisohexylcyanoacrylate nanospheres
against multidrug-resistant tumour cells in culture,” Eur. J. Cancer, vol. 30,
pp. 89–93, 1994.
[5] W. Asghar, M. Islam, A. S. Wadajkar, Y. Wan, A. Ilyas, K. T. Nguyen, and
S. M. Iqbal, “PLGA micro-and nanoparticles loaded into gelatin scaffold
for controlled drug release,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 546–553, May 2012.
[6] B. Magenheim and S. Benita, “Nanoparticle characterization: A compre-
hensive physicochemical approach,” STP Pharm. Sci., vol. 4, pp. 221–241,
1991.
[7] R. Jalil and J. R. Nixon, “Biodegradable poly (lactic acid) and poly
(lactide-co-glycolide) microcapsules: Problems associated with prepar-
ative techniques and release properties,” J. Microencapsulation, vol. 7,
pp. 297–325, 1990.
[8] J. Siepmann, K. Elkharraz, F. Siepmann, and D. Klose, “How autocatalysis
accelerates drug release from PLGA-based microparticles: A quantitative
treatment,” Biomacromolecules, vol. 6, pp. 2312–2319, 2005.
[9] L. Fan and S. K. Singh, Controlled Release: A Quantitative Treatment.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1989.
[10] D. Klose, F. Siepmann, K. Elkharraz, S. Krenzlin, and J. Siepmann,
“How porosity and size affect the drug release mechanisms from
PLGA-based microparticles,” Int. J. Pharm., vol. 314, pp. 198–206,
2006.
[11] J. Heeren, T. Grewal, A. Laatsch, D. Rottke, F. Rinninger, R. K. Murray,
D. K. Granner, P. A. Mayes, and V. W. Rodwell, “Porous nanoparticles
in drug delivery systems,” Pak. J. Pharm. Sci., vol. 19, pp. 155–158,
2006.
[12] D. L. French, D. A. Edwards, and R. W. Niven, “The inﬂuence of for-
mulation on emission, deaggregation and deposition of dry powders for
inhalation,” J. Aerosol Sci., vol. 27, pp. 769–783, 1996.
[13] D. H. Lewis, “Controlled release of bioactive agents from lactide/glycolide
polymers,” Drugs Pharma. Sci., vol. 45, pp. 1–41, 1990.
[14] D. Klose, F. Siepmann, K. Elkharraz, and J. Siepmann, “PLGA-based drug
delivery systems: Importance of the type of drug and device geometry,”
Int. J. Pharm., vol. 354, pp. 95–103, 2008.
[15] J. M. Lu, X. Wang, C. Marin-Muller, H. Wang, P. H. Lin, Q. Yao, and
C. Chen, “Current advances in research and clinical applications of
PLGA-based nanotechnology,” Expert Rev. Molecular Diagnostics, vol. 9,
pp. 325–341, 2009.
[16] K. Pays, J. Giermanska-Kahn, B. Pouligny, J. Bibette, and F. Leal-
Calderon, “Double emulsions: How does release occur?” J. Control. Rel.,
vol. 79, pp. 193–205, 2002.
[17] F. Tewes, E. Munnier, B. Antoon, L. Ngaboni Okassa, S. Cohen-Jonathan,
H. Marchais, L. Douziech-Eyrolles, M. Souce, P. Dubois, and I. Chourpa,
“Comparative study of doxorubicin-loaded poly (lactide-co-glycolide)
nanoparticles prepared by single and double emulsion methods,” Eur.
J. Pharma. Biopharm., vol. 66, pp. 488–492, 2007.
[18] F. He, R. X. Zhuo, L. J. Liu, D. B. Jin, J. Feng, and X. L. Wang, “Im-
mobilized lipase on porous silica beads: Preparation and application for
enzymatic ring-opening polymerization of cyclic phosphate,” Reactive
Functional Polymers, vol. 47, pp. 153–158, 2001.
[19] G. Zhao, T. Ishizaka, H. Kasai, H. Oikawa, and H. Nakanishi, “Fabrication
of unique porous polyimide nanoparticles using a reprecipitation method,”
Chem. Mater., vol. 19, pp. 1901–1905, 2007.
[20] H. J. Chung, H. K. Kim, J. J. Yoon, and T. G. Park, “Heparin immobi-
lized porous PLGA microspheres for angiogenic growth factor delivery,”
Pharma. Res., vol. 23, pp. 1835–1841, 2006.
[21] Y. J. Oh, J. Lee, J. Y. Seo, T. Rhim, S. H. Kim, H. J. Yoon, and K. Y. Lee,
“Preparation of budesonide-loaded porous PLGA microparticles and their
therapeutic efﬁcacy in a murine asthma model,” J. Control Rel., vol. 150,
pp. 56–62, 2011.
[22] S. B. Lee, Y. H. Kim, M. S. Chong, S. H. Hong, and Y. M. Lee, “Study of
gelatin-containing artiﬁcial skin V: Fabrication of gelatin scaffolds using
a salt-leaching method,” Biomaterials, vol. 26, pp. 1961–1968, 2005.
[23] T. G. Kim, H. J. Chung, and T. G. Park, “Macroporous and nanoﬁbrous
hyaluronic acid/collagen hybrid scaffold fabricated by concurrent electro-
spinning and deposition/leaching of salt particles,” Acta Biomaterialia,
vol. 4, pp. 1611–1619, 2008.
[24] M. Nidhin, R. Indumathy, K. J. Sreeram, and B. U. Nair, “Synthesis of
iron oxide nanoparticles of narrow size distribution on polysaccharide
templates,” Bull. Mater. Sci., vol. 31, pp. 93–96, 2008.
[25] P. Couvreur, G. Barratt, E. Fattal, P. Legrand, and C. Vauthier, “Nanocap-
sule technology: A review,” Cri. Rev. Therapeutic Drug Carrier Sys.,
vol. 19, pp. 99–134, 2002.
[26] K. Yoshioka, E. Sakai, M. Daimon, and A. Kitahara, “Role of steric
hindrance in the performance of superplasticizers for concrete,” J. Amer.
Ceramic Soc., vol. 80, pp. 2667–2671, 1997.
[27] J. F. Chen, H. M. Ding, J. X. Wang, and L. Shao, “Preparation and char-
acterization of porous hollow silica nanoparticles for drug delivery appli-
cation,” Biomaterials, vol. 25, pp. 723–727, 2004.
[28] M. S. Arayne and N. Sultana, “Porous nanoparticles in drug delivery
systems,” Pak. J. Pharma. Sci., vol. 19, pp. 158–169, 2006.
[29] C. Y. Sun, C. Qin, C. G. Wang, Z. M. Su, S. Wang, X. L. Wang, G. S. Yang,
K. Z. Shao, Y. Q. Lan, and E. B. Wang, “Chiral nanoporous metal-organic
frameworks with high porosity as materials for drug delivery,” Adv. Mater.,
vol. 23, pp. 5629–5632, 2011.
[30] J. Cheng, B. A. Teply, I. Sheriﬁ, J. Sung, G. Luther, F. X. Gu, E. Levy-
Nissenbaum, A. F. Radovic-Moreno, R. Langer, and O. C. Farokhzad,
“Formulation of functionalized PLGA-PEG nanoparticles for in vivo tar-
geted drug delivery,” Biomaterials, vol. 28, pp. 869–876, 2007.
[31] S. Dhar, F. X. Gu, R. Langer, O. C. Farokhzad, and S. J. Lippard, “Targeted
delivery of cisplatin to prostate cancer cells by aptamer functionalized Pt
(IV) prodrug-PLGA-PEG nanoparticles,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 105,
pp. 17356–17361, 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

1088
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOTECHNOLOGY, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2013
Azhar Ilyas was born in Haroonabad, Punjab,
Pakistan, in 1985. He received the Bachelor’s de-
gree in electrical engineering from the University
of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan,
in September 2007. He has been working toward his
Ph.D. under the supervision of Dr. S. M. Iqbal in the
Department of Electrical Engineering at the Univer-
sity of Texas at Arlington (UT-Arlington), TX, USA,
since September 2009.
He was a member of the Faculty of Engineering,
University of Central Punjab, Lahore, from 2007 to
2009, before he moved to USA for graduate studies. He is currently a Graduate
Research Associate in the Nano-Bio Lab, Nanotechnology Research Center at
UT-Arlington. His research interests include nanoscale biosensors, solid-state
micropores for cellular level diagnosis, and application of artiﬁcial photosyn-
thesis in photovoltaic cells.
Muhymin Islam was born in Dhaka, Bangladesh, in
1986. He received the Bachelor’s degree in electri-
cal and electronics engineering from the Bangladesh
University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, in 2009. Since 2010, he has been work-
ing toward his Ph.D. degree in the Department of
Electrical Engineering under the supervision of Dr.
S. M. Iqbal at UT-Arlington.
His research is focused on solid-state platforms
for early disease diagnostics.
Waseem Asghar was born in Sahiwal, Punjab,
Pakistan, in 1984. He received his Bachelor’s de-
gree in electrical engineering from the University
of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan, in
September 2007, and the Ph.D. degree from Univer-
sity of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA, in
April 2012.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow
at Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, and Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sci-
ences and Technology, Boston, MA, USA. His re-
search interests include disease diagnosis and prognosis, cancer detection,
biosensors, point-of-care devices, and biomaterials. He has published more
than 20 peer-reviewed journal and full-length conference papers. He has also
contributed two book chapters.
Jyothi U. Menon received the M.S. degree in bio-
engineering from University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX, USA, in 2010 where she is currently
working toward her Ph.D.
She has authored seven peer-reviewed journal ar-
ticles and one book chapter. Her research interests
include nanomaterials for pulmonary delivery, bio-
materials, drug delivery, and tissue engineering.
Aniket S. Wadajkar was born in Nanded, India,
in 1982. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. de-
grees in biomedical engineering, in 2008 and 2012,
respectively.
He is currently a Senior Scientist in Applied DNA
Sciences, NY, USA. His research interests include
drug delivery, nanobiomaterials, and tissue engineer-
ing. . He has authored over 20 journal publications
and two book chapters.
Dr. Wadajkar received the Pre-Doctoral Fellow-
ship award from the American Heart Association,
the Outstanding Bioengineer Award, and is listed in the Who’s Who Among
American Universities and Colleges.
Kytai T. Nguyen received the B.S. degree in chem-
ical engineering from the University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 1995, and the Ph.D. de-
gree in chemical engineering with an emphasis in
bioengineering from the Rice University, Houston,
TX, USA, in 2000.
She is currently an Associate Professor in the De-
partment of Bioengineering at University of Texas
at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA, and the Univer-
sity of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
TX, USA. Her research interests include biomateri-
als, drug delivery systems, gene therapy systems, cellular engineering, and tissue
engineering.
Samir M. Iqbal (S’92–M’07–SM’09) was born in
Bahrain, in 1972. He received the Bachelor’s degree
in electrical engineering from the NED University of
Engineering and Technology, Karachi, Pakistan, in
1997, and the Ph.D. degree from Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 2007.
He worked as a Post-Doctoral Research Associate
at Birck Nanotechnology Center in the Discovery
Park of Purdue University before joining University
of Texas at Arlington, Arlington in 2007, where he is
currently an Associate Professor of Electrical Engi-
neering. He holds courtesy appointment in the Department of Bioengineering
which is a joint program of the University of Texas at Arlington, and the Uni-
versity of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. He also leads
Nano-Bio Lab and serves on the Joint Graduate Studies Committee of the Bio-
engineering Program between University of Texas at Arlington and University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Maryland College Park. Downloaded on October 23,2025 at 15:23:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.